 

PRIORITY

       

 
 

OUR

PROTECT ECONOMY

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN
TO PROTECT THE ECONOMY

 

 

 

FOREWORD BY
PRIME MINISTER
STEPHEN HARPER

In this election, Canadians have a clear
choice: a choice that carries the greatest
of consequences for our economy, for our
jobs, and for our families.
Amid a global economy that is once again weak and in
turmoil, Canada’s economy remains stronger than most
– but it’s fragile, and needs protection from instability
elsewhere in the world.
On October 19, Canadians will choose which party has the
best plan, in these troubled times, to protect our economy
and protect your job.
Because our economic vision for Canada is so different
from that of our opponents, your choice will make a huge
difference. Wrong government decisions on taxes, spending,
and deficits will expose our economy to harm, and ultimately
put the jobs of hard-working Canadians at risk.
For Conservatives, protecting Canada’s economy is our
number one priority.
That’s why we have a positive plan to protect the economy
and create jobs over the next four years, and beyond.
We’ll:
Keep the federal budget balanced.
Lower taxes on small businesses and workers.
Aim to create another 1.3 million new, well-paying
jobs by 2020.
Open new markets for Canadian businesses and
products through the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Aim to add more than 700,000 new homeowners
  by 2020.
Provide new tax relief and benefits to families
and seniors.
Our plan will keep Canada’s economy moving forward.
It’s the right plan for our economy.
It’s the right plan for Canadians.
Of course, we’ll also continue to protect Canadians in a
dangerous and uncertain world, keeping our streets and
communities safe.

 But ultimately, all of these things depend on a strong and
growing economy.
So the choice in this election is this: Which government
do you trust to manage and protect the fragile Canadian
economy, and your job, in the face of global economic
turmoil?
Our Conservative Party is the only party with a proven economic
record and a low-tax, balanced budget plan for the future.
Permanent deficits, higher taxes, and more debt, as
proposed by the Liberals and the NDP, will wreck our
economy, cost you money, and possibly your job.
This platform sets out a different, better plan for the next
four years. It’s our plan to make this country – the greatest
country in the world – even stronger and more prosperous
for hard-working Canadian families, now and for generations
to come.
It’s our Economic Action Plan. It’s working. Let’s continue on
with what we know works.
 

 PROTECTING OUR ECONOMY:
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN
We have a positive plan for the next four years to
protect Canada’s economy, create new, well-paying
jobs, and help families and seniors.

BALANCED BUDGET
We balanced the budget last year – one year ahead of
schedule – and already have a significant surplus for this
year. A balanced budget is the anchor of our low-tax plan
to protect our fragile economy and help Canadian families.
We’ll continue to make the right choices to keep our budget
balanced and taxes low.

LOWER TAXES
Our low-tax pledge is rooted in our record: Canadians know
that we’ll do what we say and that we’ll manage taxpayer
dollars responsibly. We’re prepared to go even further
and entrench our low-tax plan in legislation. Our ''tax lock''
legislation will back our low-tax commitment – to families,
seniors, workers and small businesses – with the force of
the law for the next four years.

MORE AND BETTER JOBS
Our number one priority is the economy – creating jobs and
economic growth. Canada has led the G-7 in job creation
since 2006 because we’ve made the right choices. We’ve
created 1.3 million net new jobs since the depths of the
global economic recession, and our plan will create another
1.3 million new, well-paying jobs by 2020.

EXPANDED TRADE
Canada is a trading nation and we’ve made historic strides
to open new markets for Canadian businesses and their
workers. The Trans-Pacific Partnership is the largest free
trade deal in history. It provides almost 800 million new
customers throughout the Asia-Pacific region for Canadian
goods and services. Membership in this agreement is a good
deal for Canada, one that will create jobs and opportunities
and protect our economy.

 FAMILY HOME
Homeownership is a key way to support Canadian families.
And we’re helping more Canadians become homeowners by
providing new support to buy and invest in their homes. Now
one in seven Canadian households owns their own homes –
one of the highest rates in the industrialized world. And, under
our plan for affordable, responsible homeownership, we'll aim
to add more than 700,000 new homeowners by 2020.

SUPPORTING SENIORS
Canadian seniors deserve our respect and gratitude
for a lifetime of hard work in service to our families, our
communities, and our country. Our Government has lowered
taxes and enhanced benefits to make life more affordable
for Canadian seniors. And, under our plan, single and
widowed seniors will get new, major tax relief to help them
live their later years in dignity and comfort.

These are our priorities:

99
Keeping our budget balanced.
99
Lowering taxes on families, seniors, and small businesses.
99
Creating 1.3 million new jobs.
99
Opening new markets for Canadian businesses
and workers.

99
Helping 700,000 more Canadians own their own homes.
This is our positive plan to protect Canada's fragile economy
and keep it moving forward for the next four years.

 Table Of Contents
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET
AND LOW TAXES..........................................................................9
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY...... 16

Keeping taxes low.........................................................19
Opening markets for Canadian businesses................21
Cutting red tape............................................................24
Manufacturing strategy.................................................26
Skills training for new and better jobs ........................29
Our world-leading immigration system........................32
Spurring innovation and research and development........35
Creating opportunity for Canada’s farmers.................38
Promoting Canada’s fisheries......................................41
Supporting Canada’s forestry sector and its workers...... 44
Expanding new mining opportunities..........................46
Responsible resource development............................48
Building economic infrastructure.................................50
Supporting Northern economic development.............53
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING
FAMILIES AND SENIORS.......................................................... 56

The family home............................................................59
Saving for a child’s education......................................61
Saving for a secure retirement.....................................63
Tax relief for single and widowed seniors....................65
Help for Canadians with disabilities............................67
Supporting every family................................................69
Protecting consumers...................................................72
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA.. 75

Combating jihadi terrorism...........................................78
The fight against ISIS....................................................81
Protecting persecuted minorities around the world...........83

 Cyber security................................................................87
Supporting Ukraine.......................................................89
Supporting Canada’s military.......................................93
Strengthening our military assets and institutions.....96
Northern sovereignty....................................................99
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS..................102

National Anti-Drug Strategy....................................... 105
Targeting criminal gangs............................................ 108
Protecting seniors from fraud.................................... 110
Life Means Life and other justice priorities.............. 112
Protecting Canadians and supporting victims......... 115
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES....120

New Building Canada Plan........................................ 123
Standing up for Canada’s veterans.......................... 125
Voluntarism and civil society..................................... 127
Commemorating Canadian heritage and culture.... 129
Promoting arts and culture and sport...................... 131
Supporting Canada’s universal, publicly-funded
health care system..................................................... 134
Finding a cure for cancer........................................... 137
Protecting Canada’s West Coast............................... 139
Conservation and rural economic development.......141
Preserving our natural heritage................................ 144
Tackling climate change............................................ 146
Supporting economic and social development
for Aboriginal Canadians........................................... 148
Strengthening Canadian citizenship......................... 151
Protecting Canada’s democracy............................... 153
Costing our plan......................................................... 156

  

 

 

 

 

0c.? 
mom w>r>ZOmU wCUmma
>20 

 

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

To protect Canada’s economy,
a re-elected Conservative
Government will:
Ensure the federal budget remains balanced
Control government spending
Keep the tax burden low
Continue to reduce Canada’s
  debt-to-GDP ratio
Maintain our balanced budget legislation
Pass “Tax Lock” legislation to prohibit tax
increases in the next four years

Budgets don’t balance themselves. Canadian
families and small business owners understand
that. So does our Conservative Government.
Keeping Canada's public finances on a solid footing
involves hard work and tough choices. And that’s
what we’ve done.
Our Conservative Government has controlled
spending, lowered taxes, and kept Canada's debt
levels the lowest in the G-7 by far. This serves as the
fiscal foundation for our plan for Canada’s economy.

99
A balanced budget lets us return more

money back into the pockets of hard-working
families. The federal tax burden is now at its
lowest in over half a century.

99
A balanced budget lets us maintain our

low debt levels. Low public debt means
less taxpayer money dedicated to interest
payments and makes it easier for businesses
to borrow and invest at a low cost.

10 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

99
A balanced budget lets us make targeted,

affordable investments to protect our fragile
economy and help families. This is the basis
for our recent enhancement to the monthly
Universal Child Care Benefit, our historic
infrastructure investment, and the new
measures set out in our plan for the next
four years.

99
A balanced budget allows us to protect key

programs such as health care and education
without having to make deep spending cuts,
like previous Liberal governments.

99
A balanced budget ensures that we’re not
passing on a massive debt burden to our
children and grandchildren.

It's for these reasons that our Conservative
Government has been so committed to balancing
the budget. A balanced budget is the anchor for our
low-tax plan that's helping Canadian families and
protecting Canada’s fragile economy.
We ran a temporary deficit in 2009 to help protect
and create jobs in the face of the worst global
economic recession since the 1930s. But as part of
our Economic Action Plan, we also set out a clear,
credible plan to return to a balanced budget. And
we've been focused on that plan ever since.
Unlike the previous Liberal government, we've
continued to increase transfer payments to the
provinces and territories for health care and
education as we promised. And we've kept taxes
low. Instead, we've eliminated the deficit by
controlling government spending, by eliminating
waste and duplication, and by getting rid of
outdated or ineffective programs.

The Conservatives also
“enjoy
an extra advantage,

one that incumbency offers,
but doesn’t guarantee: a track
record of doing almost exactly
what it says it will do. In the
2010 budget, the Conservatives set out a path to balance the budget based on
what amounted to a freeze on
direct program expenditures
for five years in a row. In the
2011 election campaign, the
Conservatives promised to
eliminate a $33 billion budget
deficit in time for the 2015
election. At the time, I didn’t
think that either commitment
was feasible, but the Conservatives ended up delivering
on both promises.

”

Stephen Gordon, professor of economics
at Laval University (October 5, 2015).).

Our plan is working. We returned to balance in
2014-15 – a full year ahead of schedule. And,
according to the Department of Finance, we're
on track for the second balanced budget in a row
this year.
Canada's sound public finances are the envy of the
world, a source of our economic strength, and a reelected Conservative Government will ensure they
remain that way.
Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 11

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

Spending beyond our means, as the Liberals and
NDP would have us do, would cause structural
deficits that would damage our economy, lead to
tax hikes and program cuts, and burden future
generations with heavy debt. We need only to
look around the world at countries like Greece
to see the consequences of profligate and
irresponsible spending.
That’s not our plan, and not the way forward for
Canada. We'll continue to advance our low-tax,
balanced budget plan for jobs and growth, and we'll
continue to operate in the black, spending sensibly
within our means and keeping the books balanced.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

balance the budget every year in the next four
years while keeping taxes low, increasing
transfers to the provinces and territories
for health care and education, and making
affordable investments to protect the
economy and help Canadian families.

We'll accomplish this by controlling the growth
of direct program spending and maintaining the
operating budget freeze for one more year. These
steps will provide the fiscal room to make the
affordable investments set out in our plan and
ensure that the budget remains balanced without
raising taxes.
Our plan is based on the fiscal projections in the
2015 Budget presented in April. These projections
were based on independent, expert advice from
Canada’s leading private-sector economists, and
include contingencies of up to $3 billion per year to
account for the current global economic uncertainty.
Put simply: Canadians can count on us to keep
the budget balanced and taxes low in the next four
years. We’re so committed to these goals, we'll
entrench them in law.
Our balanced budget legislation ensures that the only
acceptable deficit is one that responds to a recession
or truly extraordinary circumstances. Deficits outside
of these rare scenarios are unacceptable.

12 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will
follow the Federal Budget Balanced Act to
keep spending under control, the budget
balanced, and taxes low.

99
We will also continue to reduce Canada’s debt

burden to meet our debt-to-GDP target of 25
percent by 2021. Canada now has the lowest
debt levels by far among G-7 countries, and
we’ll make sure our children and grandchildren
aren’t forced to pay the price for reckless
borrowing and spending.

Canadians know they can trust us to lower their
taxes and keep them low. This is a major point of
difference between our Conservative Party and the
Liberals and NDP. These two parties have promised
some combination of higher taxes on individuals,
families, seniors, and small businesses – including
taking away income splitting and eliminating TaxFree Savings Accounts in whole or in part.
Our low-tax pledge is rooted in our record. Canadians
know that we’ll do what we say and that we’ll
manage taxpayer dollars responsibly. But unlike the
Liberals and NDP, we’re prepared to go even further
and entrench our low-tax plan in legislation.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

pass legislation imposing a “tax lock” that
prohibits increases to federal personal and
business income tax rates, sales tax rates,
and discretionary payroll taxes over the next
four years. This pledge backs our low-tax
commitment with the force of the law.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 13

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

AT RISK
Our Conservative Government is the only party in this
election with a clear plan to keep the budget balanced
and taxes low. Not only do we have a clear track
record, but we’re putting forward new measures to
ensure the budget stays balanced and the tax burden
continues to fall.
The Liberals and NDP have put forward plans to run
large, permanent deficits, hike taxes on workers,
families, and small businesses, and leave our economy
exposed. They’ll do this by:
Adding billions of dollars in new spending,
running ongoing, permanent deficits, and
accumulating billions more in debt.
Repealing our balanced budget legislation
so they can run deficits without being
accountable to Canadians.
Putting important programs like health care
and education at risk as a result of their
reckless and irresponsible spending.
Eliminating the Family Tax Cut which is
providing up to $2,000 in tax relief for 1.7
million families.
Taking away the monthly Universal Child-Care
Benefit which is providing nearly $2,000
per year for children under age 6, and more
than $700 per year for children aged 6 to 17.
The UCCB goes to all the nearly four million
families with children.
Shutting down Tax-Free Savings Accounts
which are helping 11 million Canadians save
and grow their savings tax-free.
Cancelling Pension Income Splitting which is
providing one million senior couples with more
than $1 billion annual tax relief.

14 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A BALANCED BUDGET AND LOW TAXES

Hiking payroll taxes – as much as $1,000
per year for someone making $60,000 – on
Canadian workers and small businesses.
Driving up the price of everything Canadian
families buy – including gasoline, groceries, and
home heating fuel – by imposing carbon pricing
schemes on the Canadian economy.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 15

  

 

 

 

 

 

0c.? 
mom moozo_<_<

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

To protect our economy and
create jobs, a re-elected
Conservative Government will:
Aim to create 1.3 million new jobs
by 2020
Cut taxes on small businesses from 11
to 9 percent
Lower payroll taxes on small businesses
and workers by more than 20 percent
Implement the Trans-Pacific Partnership
free trade agreement
Provide new incentives for manufacturers
to purchase equipment and invest in new
technologies
Grant tax relief to businesses that hire
apprentices

As much of the rest of the world continues to
struggle with the fallout from the recent global
financial recession, Canada has emerged in a
position of relative strength.
We have one of the best job-creation records in the
G-7. Indeed, since the depths of the global recession,
1.3 million net new jobs – mostly well-paying, fulltime positions in the private sector – have been
created. That’s more Canadians working than before
the recession. That’s more Canadians working than
ever before in our country’s history.
And it’s so much more than just a number. With
every job created, there's another Canadian who
knows the dignity of supporting his or her family,
and another family with a brighter future.
Having a good job is the difference between
worrying about today and dreaming about tomorrow
– which is why the creation of new, well-paying jobs
for Canadians will continue to be our top priority.

17 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

The best way to ensure more and better jobs is
to create the right conditions for our enterprising
businesses to do what they do best. Businesses
create jobs and opportunities that make our economy
stronger, and the new products and ideas that
make our lives better. That means continuing with
our Conservative plan to balance the budget, keep
taxes and debt low, open new markets for Canadians
products, make smart, affordable investments in
the economy, and support entrepreneurs and small
businesses as they hire and grow.
Keeping our budget balanced and lowering taxes on
small businesses is the right way for government to
protect Canada’s fragile economy and create jobs.
The other parties have a different vision. The Liberals
and NDP believe that they can raise taxes, run deficits,
and accumulate more government debt without killing
jobs. But all you have to do is look around the world to
see the consequences of that type of high-tax, high-debt
agenda. It saps small business ingenuity and diminishes
the reward for innovation and hard-work. It punishes
success and discourages entrepreneurs from entering
the market. It chokes off job creation and, ultimately,
wrecks economies. In Canada, it would mean more
Canadians out of work and looking for jobs. Canadians
simply can’t afford the high-tax agenda of the Liberals
and NDP.
The path forward is clear: only a re-elected Conservative
Government will continue to implement its low-tax,
balanced budget plan to protect Canada’s economy and
create jobs.
This is the right path. It’s working. And we intend to keep
moving forward.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will build on
our job-creation record by implementing a positive
plan to create 1.3 million net new jobs by 2020.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 18

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Keeping taxes low
We understand that keeping taxes low helps small
businesses to grow and create new, well-paying
jobs. Because of our low-tax, balanced budget
plan for jobs and economic growth, Canada
has the lowest overall tax rate on new business
investment of all the major advanced economies,
and our tax rate on small businesses continues to
fall. Canada is now often cited as one of the best
countries in the world in which to do business.
A re-elected Conservative Government will
maintain and build on this low-tax record.

99
We will not raise taxes on the businesses

that create jobs for Canadians or on
Canadian workers. Our “tax lock”
legislation will prohibit income and sales
tax rate increases and discretionary
payroll tax hikes on Canadian businesses
and workers for the next four years.

19 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Instead, we will carry out our plan to lower

the tax rate on small businesses – which
we’ve already lowered from 13 percent
to 11 percent – another two percentage
points, to nine percent, by 2019. This is the
largest reduction in the small business tax
rate in a quarter century.

The Liberals and NDP have promised to raise
payroll taxes on workers and small businesses
by billions of dollars. But we know that lower
payroll taxes encourage small businesses to
hire more Canadians, and to pay them higher
wages. That’s why we’ve worked so hard to keep
those taxes down.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Our low-tax record is clear. We have kept payroll
taxes low and in 2014 we created the two-year
Small Business Job Credit to provide more than
$550 million in payroll tax relief for 780,000 jobcreating businesses across the country.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to lower these taxes. Beginning
in 2017, when the current freeze on EI
premiums expires, we will lower them by
more than 20 percent – a substantial benefit
to Canadian small businesses and workers.
Our small businesses will be able to hire even
more workers, and for 16 million Canadian
workers, it’ll mean a significant salary raise.

We're the only party - the only ones that can be
trusted - to keep taxes low on small businesses and
their workers for the next four years.

CFIB applauds the gov“ernment
for lowering the tax

burden on Canada’s small
businesses now that the
budget has been balanced.
Reducing the small business
corporate tax rate was viewed
by CFIB members as the most
effective measure the federal government could take to
strengthen the performance
of small firms. We are especially pleased that government intends to legislate the
full small business tax cut
plan before the election.

”

Canadian Federation of Independent
Business (April 21, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 20

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Opening markets for
Canadian businesses
From the days of the French and British
traders who first laid the foundations of our
modern economy, Canada has been a trading
nation. Trade is the lifeblood of our economy.
It accounts for 60 percent of our GDP, and one
in five Canadian jobs. Canadian businesses
and workers know instinctively that we can
compete with the world’s best as long as the
playing field is level. We also know that
we’re better off when our goods and services
can reach global markets without barriers
and restrictions.
Yet previous governments failed Canadians
when it came to negotiating trade access for
Canadian products. While other countries were
busy signing free-trade deals and receiving
preferential access to important markets,
the Liberals weren’t even at the negotiating
table. And Canadian businesses and workers
suffered.
21 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Our Conservative Government has reversed
this inaction and opened up new markets for
Canadian products and services.
When we took office Canada had free trade
agreements with only five other countries. We’ve
now reached agreements with 44, countries,
encompassing more than half the global
marketplace, including historic trade deals with
South Korea and the European Union, with its
500-million person, $18-trillion economy. These
agreements have given Canadian businesses
and their workers access to more than half the
global marketplace.
Yet there’s more to accomplish. In the past
few days we have concluded the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) agreement with 11 other
founding countries, including the United States,
Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. The TPP
is the largest free trade deal in history. It gives

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

greater access for Canadian goods and services to
almost 800 million consumers throughout the fastgrowing Asia-Pacific region.
It’s a great deal for Canada that will significantly
benefit our economy and Canadians’ prosperity.
The TPP will protect and create jobs, grow Canada's
economy, and provide financial security to workers
and businesses in all regions of the country. It
guarantees preferential access for Canadian goods
and services in a range of sectors including agriculture
and agri-food, fish and seafood, forestry, metals and
mining, and manufactured industrial goods.

99
The Trans-Pacific Partnership is a historic

agreement that will protect and create jobs,
and grow Canada's economy now and in the
future. That’s why a re-elected Conservative
Government will ratify and implement the TPP.

As part of the TPP negotiations, we’ve defended
and protected Canada’s supply management
system, as we committed to. We've limited access
to only three and one quarter percent of our dairy
market. And we've announced key programs
to ensure Canada's supply-managed sectors
-- and the communities that depend on them
-- continue to thrive. To ensure stability for supplymanaged farmers through the implementation
of our trade agreements, we’ve established longterm income and quota guarantee programs.
And we're supporting investment in cutting-edge
technologies for our processing sector and
marketing of world-class Canadian products,
which are of the highest quality.

is an exciting moment
“forThis
Canada…we’re looking

at huge gains for Canadian
farmers, food processors, and
companies in forestry, mining,
aerospace, financial services
and information technology,
among other industries.

”

Canadian Chamber of Commerce
(October 5, 2015).

is an historic moment
“forThis
the hundreds of thousands

of Canadians who are employed
by Canada’s export-based
agriculture and agri-food sector.
Whether you are a farm family
who depends on world markets,
a processor, exporter, or live
in a community supported by
agriculture or food processing,
improved access to TPP markets
bodes well for a stable and
prosperous future.

”

Canadian Agri-Food Trade Alliance
(October 5, 2015).

Free trade only works when it's also fair – and
this means a modern and effective system of
remedy when a Canadian company has been
treated unjustly.
A re-elected Conservative Government will take
steps to modernize our system and ensure that it's
comparable with the practices and policies of our
main trading partners. To this end we’ll:

99
Mandate the Canada Border Services Agency
to carry out a full investigation of trade
complaints even in cases when preliminary
reviews by the Canadian International Trade
Tribunal come back negative.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 22

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
Require the Canadian International Trade

Tribunal to carry out an automatic five-year
review of every finding of non-compliance,
to ensure the conflict has been resolved in a
satisfactory manner.

[The Government] should
“increase
alignment and

coordination, and develop a
single-window interface for
companies. Business cases
are influenced by departments
and ministries across
governments. A coordinated
strategy to help companies
win mandates should be led
by a single federal unit. This
coordinating unit should also
provide a single-window
interface for companies
seeking approvals and
supports. It should mobilize
others to address a range
of issues, including international and interprovincial
labour mobility, human capital
development, access to natural
resources, border services,
transport integration, and
trade and regulation.

”

Public Policy Forum, Attracting Global
Mandates and Investment in Canada
(2011).

23 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Continue to work with stakeholders such as
the Canadian Steel Producers Association
to ensure that the system is effective and
accessible, and ultimately creates a levelplaying field for Canadian businesses.

The federal government provides a wide range of
programs and services to firms looking to invest in
Canada and to Canadian businesses trying to sell
their goods and services abroad. These initiatives
help attract investment and job creation in Canada
and support export-oriented Canadian businesses
in their search for new market opportunities and
new customers.
There remains, however, room for improvement.
The system can be difficult for small firms to
navigate. Government efforts to attract investment
and promote job creation can sometimes be
stymied by a lack of coordination.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish an Investment and Trade Promotion
Office with a mandate to coordinate the
government’s various efforts to encourage
businesses in other countries to invest in
Canada, and to promote Canadian exports
abroad. The Office will be a one-stop shop to
attract investment and product mandates
to Canada and help growing Canadian
businesses enter new markets.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Cutting red tape
Small businesses should be focused on creating
jobs, not filling out paperwork. That’s why our
Conservative Government has made it a priority
to reduce bureaucratic red tape.

hours Canadians are now spending building their
businesses instead of filling out forms.

We’ve passed world-leading “One-forOne” legislation that requires bureaucrats
to eliminate a current regulation before
establishing a new one. We’ve taken steps to
harmonize Canadian regulations with those of
our major trading partners. And we’ve improved
the way we consult with small business owners
about government policy.

A re-elected Conservative Government will build
on this record by:

The result of all this is a dramatic change in
the culture of the federal government, putting
unprecedented emphasis on the needs of
Canadian small businesses. And the benefits so
far are clear: Small businesses are now spending
$32 million less sorting through regulatory red
tape. That’s hundreds of thousands of working
24 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

But there's always more that can be done.

99
Launching a new round of consultations,

asking small business owners across the
country for feedback on our current reforms
and suggestions for future measures.

99
Expanding the “red tape baseline,”

increasing significantly the scope of the red
tape burden subject to the One-for-One rule.

99
And with a more comprehensive baseline,

challenging ourselves to reduce the overall
burden by 20 percent. We’ll achieve this goal
while maintaining the highest standards in all
areas, including health and safety.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

To achieve our 20 percent target we will take
short-term, immediate action to cut red tape in
ways that are real, measureable and meaningful
to Canadians.

99
We’ll work with the Retail Council of Canada

to better harmonize Canada’s child car seat
regulations with the United States. This will
reduce the red tape burden for our retailers,
and at the same time allow them to offer
greater choice and better prices to Canadian
parents with young families.

[We] can be proud that
“Canada
is now the first

country in the world to require
that for every new regulation
introduced one of equivalent
burden must be removed.

”

Laura Jones, Executive Vice-President,
Canadian Federation of Independent
Business (April 24, 2015).

99
And we’ll make life easier for the 1.2 million
Canadians who claim home-office expense
deductions, 80 percent of whom are selfemployed. Anyone who makes a claim once
will be able to use the same cost estimates,
adjusted for inflation, in subsequent years.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 25

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Manufacturing
strategy
In a fast-changing world, here's one thing that
hasn't changed: Canada's manufacturing sector
is absolutely vital to our growing economy. It
accounts for about 11 percent of our GDP, 61
percent of Canadian exports, and provides good,
secure jobs to almost 1.7 million Canadians
across the country. Indirectly, it employs many
millions more. Manufacturing firms pay out
$1.85 billion weekly in salaries to Canadian
workers across the country.
But what is changing is the nature of the work.
It's becoming more skilled, more specialized, and
more globally competitive.
Liberal leader Justin Trudeau says that
manufacturing’s time is passed, that it's
time for Canada to “transition away” from
manufacturing. Our Conservative Government
disagrees. Manufacturing has played a
key role in Canada’s economy since before
26 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Confederation – and, with the right plan, will
continue to sustain high-quality, high-paying
jobs and economic activity across the country.
Our Conservative Government has a positive plan
to sustain our manufacturing sector. We’re:

99
Lowering taxes to make it easier for

manufacturers to invest in advanced
technology and equipment.

99
Helping Canadians acquire the skills and

training they need to take advantage of new
opportunities in manufacturing.

99
Opening new markets for manufacturers to
find customers and sell their products.

99
Making strategic investments to encourage
research and development and the creation
of new products and technologies.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

This is what our manufacturing strategy is all
about. And it’s working. Manufacturing wages are
up nearly 20 percent since we’ve come to office.
But there’s more to be done to support what the
Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters have called
our “manufacturing renaissance.”
Manufacturers need to invest in new machinery
and equipment to remain globally competitive,
expand their businesses, and create good new
jobs. To help with this, we’ve reduced taxes
steadily on these investments.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

carry out our ten-year plan to lower the tax
burden on Canadian manufacturers that
acquire the machinery and equipment they
need to succeed.

Canada is attracting high-quality, value-added
manufacturing investment. But more can be done to
bolster advanced manufacturing across the country.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

support a new Advanced Manufacturing Hub
in partnership with employers, our colleges
and universities, and other stakeholders to
encourage the development of new cuttingedge products and technologies. The new
center, located in Southwestern Ontario,
will become a catalyst for high-quality,
value-added investment and jobs in the
manufacturing sector.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a $100-million Manufacturing
Technology Demonstration Fund to support
large-scale, cutting-edge manufacturing
projects in the developmental, pre-commercial
stages. This fund will build on our existing
significant investments in science and
technology to make Canada a world leader in
new manufacturing technologies.

In recent years, the federal
“government
has introduced a

number of important fiscal
measures that are already
making a significant positive
contribution to business
investment, innovation, and
job growth. Reductions in the
business tax rate, the extension
of the two-year write-off for
investments in manufacturing
and processing machinery and
equipment, the elimination of
import duties on materials
and equipment used in
manufacturing, and the signing
of key international trade
agreements will set the framework for growth in the future.

”

Jay Myers, Canadian Manufacturers &
Exporters (August 2014).

This new Fund is exactly
“in line
with what we have

called for. We believe that a
technology demonstration
fund is important because it
would improve the ability of
Canada's leading manufacturers
to secure new investments in
major industrial R&D mandates,
strengthen our technology base
in advanced manufacturing,
and lead to new high tech
supply chain opportunities for
small and medium-sized firms
throughout Canada's
manufacturing sector.

”

Jay Myers, Canadian Manufacturers &
Exporters (September 20, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 27

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
We'll also renew the Automotive Innovation

Fund for ten years, beginning in 2018-19, at
baseline funding of $100 million per year.
This will help to create a stable, predictable
environment for new automotive investment
in Canada.

99
In addition, we'll change the program's

parameters in the immediate term to include
bricks and mortar as eligible expenses and
offer grants rather than repayable loans for
greenfield investments and investments in
existing facilities that guarantee a long-term
presence and operation.

We still believe the phrase "Made in Canada"
translates well around the world: It means highquality goods built by highly skilled workers, and
it inspires confidence that a product is the very
best. And on our watch, Canada will never turn
away from this legacy of excellence.

28 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Skills training
for new and better jobs
A big part of our Conservative Government’s
agenda has been providing support to those
Canadians looking to upgrade their skills for
a new job, enter the skilled trades, or obtain
credential recognition for their international
training. Having the right skills is often the key to
finding a new job or getting a pay raise.
As part of this agenda, our Government
has always made a priority of supporting
apprenticeships and Canadians working in the
skilled trades. These are the people who are
literally building this great country, and one
estimate predicts that Canada will need one
million more skilled workers by 2020.
One measure we’ve taken to help young
Canadians launch careers in the skilled trades is
the Apprenticeship Job Creation Tax Credit. The
program has been a resounding success, with the
number of businesses using this tax credit rising
29 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

six fold – from about 2,000 to almost 12,000 and
nearly 68,000 apprentices.
To build on this success, and to encourage
more employers to create more jobs for the
next generation of skilled workers, a re-elected
Conservative Government will take further steps
to support those who wish to enter the skilled
trades and to help Canadians wishing to update
their skills for a new or better-paying jobs. These
steps include:

99
Enhancing and extending the Apprenticeship
Job Creation Tax Credit – raising the
amount employers can claim to $2,500 and
extending the credit into the third and fourth
years of an apprenticeship program.

99
Establishing a new Skilled Trades Job

Experience Program to help up to 2,000
young Canadians get valuable job
experience working in the skilled trades.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
Working with the provinces and territories,

employers, and interested post-secondary
institutions to develop curriculum that better
responds to employer and market needs.

99
Implementing Canada Apprentice Loans

to help aspiring tradespeople get the training
they need.

99
Continuing to support skills-training

programming such as the Aboriginal Skills
and Employment Training Strategy and the
Skills and Partnership Fund to help First
Nations participate fully in the economy and
find high-paying, high-quality jobs.

99
Maintaining programs such as the

Opportunities Fund and the Enabling
Accessibility Fund to help disabled
Canadians participate in the job market.

We heartily endorse the
“objective
of the Canada

Apprentice Loan to help more
trades trainees complete their
apprenticeship and become
certified journeypersons. The
Government of Canada has
recognized the financial
burden faced by apprentices
when they return to the
classroom while maintaining
their monthly financial
obligations, and supports such
as the Canada Apprentice Loan
help reduce that constant
pressure.

”

Nobina Robinson, CEO, Polytechnics
Canada (March 20, 2015).

Canada is a beacon of freedom and prosperity to
people all around the world, and attracts countless
immigrants every year seeking a better place to raise
their families and pursue their dreams.
But too often they find it challenging to pursue their
careers here because of difficulties having their
professional credentials recognized, leaving them
under-employed and unable to maximize both their
own potential and their contribution to our country.
In fact, this problem costs the Canadian economy
about $2 billion every year.
Our Government has worked hard to help new
Canadians in this position. In 2011 we launched a
pilot program that provided loans to support new
Canadians who needed help with training and
licensing to have their international credentials
recognized here in Canada. It was a significant
success, distributing 2,000 loans across the
country – and recovering more than 99 percent of
the money lent. So in Economic Action Plan 2015,
we made this program permanent.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

build on this success story by doubling
the size of the program, and setting a goal
of providing as many as 20,000 foreign
credential recognition loans over the next
four years.
Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 30

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

“

The [Canada Job Grant]
will put employers in the
driver’s seat and ensures
training dollars are tied to
real jobs.

”

Progressive Contractors Association
of Canada

99
We’ll also work with the provinces and

territories, through the Pan-Canadian
Framework for the Assessment and Recognition
of Foreign Qualifications, to improve the service
standards for accreditation decisions for target,
high-demand occupations under the Framework
from one year to 60 days.

The Canada Job Grant is the most important
reform to federal skills-training program in
decades. The new Canada Job Grant helps
employers train new or existing employees for jobs
that need to be filled. It’s providing federal grants
of up to $10,000 per worker for skills upgrades,
on the condition that the training is tied to new
or better jobs. The program is working. Nearly
50,000 grants have been funded to date.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to support the Canada Job Grant
and consider ways to build on its success in
other job-training programs.

31 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Our world-leading
immigration system
Canada is a welcoming country and attracts
many of the world’s best and brightest who are
searching for freedom and opportunity, while
continuing our tradition of family reunification
and refugee protection. Our Conservative
Government has maintained immigration at
historically high levels, attracting newcomers
who have the skills and experience our economy
needs. Since 2006, we have welcomed over
2.5 million new permanent residents, including
240,000 refugees, and have sworn-in 1.6 million
new Canadian citizens.
To ensure that newcomers succeed,
while growing the Canadian economy, the
Conservative Government has made important
reforms, including:

99
Moving to a fast and flexible immigration
system where the priority focus is on
meeting Canada’s labour market needs.

32 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Creating the Canadian Experience class that
invites foreign students who have graduated
from Canadian universities and colleges to
stay and obtain permanent residency.

99
Radically improving the geographic

distribution of immigrants across Canada,
partly by increasing the Provincial Nominee
Programs by tenfold.

99
Eliminating massive backlogs created

by previous Liberal governments that left
aspiring Canadians waiting for years.

99
Establishing a new Expression of Interest

system that shifts from a passive processing
of applications to fast-tracking of applicants
with jobs offers or in-demand skills.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
Reforming the Temporary Foreign Worker

Program to prevent abuses, and ensure that
Canadians always get the first chance at
available jobs.

99
Increasing family reunification by 10%,

while introducing the popular new ten-year
multiple-entry Super Visa for parents and
grandparents.

99
Cutting the Liberals’ right of landing fee in

We applaud Minister
“Kenney
and the government

for making changes to our
immigration policy and programs that support economic
growth by focusing on our
skilled labour needs.

”

Canadian Chamber of Commerce
(December 11, 2012).

half, saving newcomers hundreds of millions
of dollars.

99
Tripling funding for settlement services, like
free language classes and job search skills.

99
Creating free pre-arrival orientation

counselling for selected economic immigrants
to help them get a head start on credential
recognition and finding employment before
they get to Canada.

While our government has welcomed a record number
of newcomers, we have also strengthened the integrity
of our immigration system, cracking down on those
who would abuse Canada’s generosity by:

99
Adopting the Cracking Down on Crooked

Immigration Consultants Act, and designating
a stronger new regulatory body for
immigration consultants.

99
Combatting immigration marriage fraud with

a two-year residency requirement, which has
resulted in a significant decline in commercial
marriages of convenience.

99
Reforming the asylum system to ensure that

bona fide refugee claimants get protection,
and bogus claimants are removed, in months
rather than years. This has led to a large
reduction in the number of unfounded asylum
claims being made in Canada.

99
Successfully combatting human smuggling,

through the adoption of the Protecting
Canada’s Immigration System Act, which has
helped to stop dangerous marine smuggling
operations from targeting Canada.
Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 33

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
Significantly improving immigration security

screening through the adoption of a
biometric visa requirement, electronic travel
authorization for visa-exempt nationals, an
entry-exit information system, and the Faster
Removal of Foreign Criminals Act.

These policies are helping to transform Canada’s
immigration system, support Canada’s economy,
and provide greater opportunity to new Canadians.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to make the immigration system
faster, flexible, and more responsive to the
needs of Canada’s economy.

99
We'll continue to be a world leader in refugee
protection.

99
We'll increase the intake of applications for
the parents and grandparents sponsorship
program, as the backlog and processing
times continue to decrease.

34 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Spurring innovation and
research and development
The marketplace is dynamic. Canadian
businesses grow and succeed by staying
ahead of the competition. This means
adopting new technologies and developing
new goods, services, and processes. Staying
ahead means never growing complacent and
always innovating.
Our Conservative Government has helped
Canadian businesses invest and grow through
targeted tax relief, new financing to develop
products and processes, and partnerships with
universities, colleges, and polytechnics to test
out new ideas and turn them into the next big
technology success story.
A re-elected Conservative Government will
continue to help Canadian businesses adopt
advanced technologies and carry out research
and development by:

35 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Implementing the $100 million

Automotive Supplier Innovation Program
to support product development and
technology demonstration by Canadian
automotive parts suppliers.

99
Rolling out the $200 million Advanced

Manufacturing Fund to support new
and innovative products and production
methods in Ontario.

99
Working with Canada’s world-leading

aerospace industry to develop a national
supplier development initiative to ensure
Canada’s aerospace industry remains
a global technology leader and a major
source of high-quality jobs.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
Continuing our participation in the

International Space Station which will
mean new opportunities for Canada’s
space industry, and expanding support for
Canada’s satellite telecommunications
sector through its partnership with the
European Space Agency.

99
Providing ongoing support to the National

Research Council’s transformation to better
serve the research and development needs
of Canadian businesses. This includes
ongoing support for the Industrial Research
Assistance Program which is helping smalland medium-sized businesses finance
research initiatives.

99
Expanding our support for the National

Optics Institute in Quebec City, to continue
its leadership in business-oriented optic and
photonic research.

We’ll also continue to support research and
development at Canada’s universities, colleges,
and polytechnics. Our Government has invested
over $13 billion in science, technology and
innovation since 2006. And Canada has
consistently ranked first in the G-7 for research
and development spending in the higher
education sector as a share of GDP.
A re-elected Conservative Government will
continue to support basic and applied postsecondary research by:

99
Implementing the $1.5 billion Canada First

Research Excellence Fund to support worldleading research projects that create longterm economic advantage for Canada.

99
Continuing to support the Canadian

Foundation for Innovation to finance
research infrastructure on university,
college, and polytechnic campuses. We'll
provide $1.33 billion over six years, starting
in 2017-18, to support the Foundation’s
ongoing work.

[The association] wel“comes
today's federal budget

announcement of the Automotive Supplier Innovation
Program. A program which
addresses the critical gap in
support for industry based
product development that lies
between the basic research
conducted in universities and
fully-commercialized products
in the marketplace is a welcomed course of action.

”

Canadian Vehicle Manufacturers'
Association (April 21, 2015).

A national supply chain
“initiative
will have a significant
long-term impact on the
industry’s ability to grow
individual companies and
help them scale the supply
chain faster than they have in
the past. This is good news
for Canadian companies, their
employees, and our economy.
Aerospace Industry Association of
Canada (April 21, 2015).

”

is a pivotal moment
“forThis
research excellence and

innovation in Canada. The
establishment of an ambitious
new research excellence fund,
coupled with the commitment of
enhanced funding in discovery
research through the federal
granting councils, represent a
catalytic investment. This shows
that the government is taking a
strategic approach to creating
prosperity in Canada.

”

Association of Universities and Colleges
of Canada (February 11, 2014).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 36

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

“

The federal government's
$1.33-billion investment
to the Canada Foundation
for Innovation - the largest
single investment ever made
in research infrastructure
support - will allow universities to attract the very best
talent and conduct the kind
of ground-breaking research
that transforms lives and
meets Canada's strategic
goals for success.

”

Council of Ontario Universities (April 21,
2015).

37 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Investing in ongoing support for the Social

Sciences and Humanities Research Council,
Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
and the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Creating opportunity
for Canada’s farmers
It's no exaggeration to say that the family farm
is the foundation of the Canada we love today.
The products have evolved, the markets have
changed, and the technology has advanced, but
some things remain constant: From before the
sun comes up to long after it goes down, farmers
across Canada do the backbreaking work that
feeds the country. The work is hard, and financially
risky – but absolutely vital to Canadians.
It’s also vital to our economy. The agriculture
and agri-food sectors account for more
than $100 billion in economic activity every
year, and employ more than two million
Canadians. The importance of agriculture to
our national interest can’t be overstated. And
our Conservative Government’s support for
farmers is unwavering.
A significant part of our support for the sector has
been dedicated to innovation and crop science.
38 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Our Government has consistently supported
strategic research and development by industry
into agricultural technologies, processes, practices
and services – research that drives growth and
creates jobs and opportunities in the industry by
making it more sustainable and more globally
competitive.
The projects we are supporting are as diverse as
the industry itself. The Agri-Innovation program,
for instance, has been used to develop pestmanagement tools in the blueberry industry;
to find new and innovative ways to turn food
by-products into environmentally friendly, valueadded goods; and to increase the competitiveness
of our food-processing industry while making our
food better, healthier, and safer.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

increase funding to the Agri-Innovation
program by $100 million over three years,
and make projects driven by universities and
colleges eligible for financing.

Our farmers and their produce can compete with
the best in the world. Our Government has been
there to help them enter global markets and find
new customers. We established the Market Access
Secretariat in 2009 to serve as a single-window to
help Canadian farmers with trade-related issues.
We've hired trade commissioners dedicated to
agriculture issues. And we've co-funded marketing
activities with industry to enhance Canada’s
agricultural presence in priority markets.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

increase support for the Agri-Marketing
Program to help promote Canada’s agricultural
and agri-food products around the world,
building on our international reputation for
excellence and increasing the visibility of the
Canadian brand in important markets.

99
We’ll also continue to expand the activities

of the Market Access Secretariat to help
Canadian farmers diversify into new markets.

99
As we open new markets for agricultural

products, we’ll continue to stand up for
Canadian farmers and industries by defending
our system of supply management in all
international forums and trade negotiations.

action demonstrates
“thatThisgovernment
is listening to
farmers’ concerns. It speaks
to their ongoing commitment
to address service problems
with Canada’s rail transportation system and moves us
closer to solving the complex
grain logistics challenges
that we face.

”

Canadian Canola Growers Association
(May 30, 2014).

The federal government’s
“strong
support for building new
markets and maintaining
market access will be very
valuable to the soybean sector.
As acreage and production of
soybeans continues to expand
in Canada, this partnership
with the Government of
Canada will help secure new
markets and contribute
to economic growth in the
sector.

”

Jim Everson, Executive Director, Soy
Canada (June 25, 2015).

We understand that market access also requires
a robust transportation system with fair rules and
accountabilities. Our Government passed the Fair
Rail for Grain Farmers Act in May 2014 to provide
more certainty and better service standards with
respect to grain volumes for farmers and shippers.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 39

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

We also launched a broader review of our
transportation system to determine what policy
changes should be made to address key issues
facing the transportation sector, including ensuring
Canada’s supply chains have the capacity, flexibility
and resiliency to meet future demands. The review
panel, led by the Honourable David Emerson, will
provide recommendations to the government later
this year.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will take action to improve Canada’s
transportation network and support market
access for Canadian farmers, based
upon the recommendations of the
transportation review.

40 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Promoting Canada’s
fisheries
Commercial fishing has been a pillar of the
Canadian economy since the 16th century.
Today, Canada’s commercial fishery employs,
directly and indirectly, about 80,000 Canadians,
and exports about $5 billion worth of fish and
other seafood every year.
Our Government has a strong record of
supporting Canadians who make their living on
the water, and is committed to the continued
success of this industry and the prosperity
of the Canadians it employs. Among our
accomplishments are:

99
New measures targeting fish harvesters

who are not compliant with the Preserving
the Independence of the Inshore Fleet in
Canada’s Atlantic Fisheries Policy.

41 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Ongoing maintenance and upgrades to

Canada’s small craft harbours – including
more than 250 small craft harbour
improvement projects planned over the
next two years.

99
Establishing and expanding the Recreational
Fisheries Conservation Partnerships
Program to conserve and protect Canada’s
recreational fisheries. The program has
funded nearly 300 conservation projects
across the country to date.

A re-elected Conservative Government will
continue to build on these initiatives with a focus
on science, marine conservation, and promoting
Canadian products in new markets including
through the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Canada's most important commercial fishery is
lobster, with exports generating more than $1
billion a year. It has supported Canadian fishing
families for more than a century, and plays a
substantial role in the economies of coastal
communities in Atlantic Canada and Quebec.
Our Government has seen the lobster fishery
through good times and bad, including investing
significant funds through the Community
Adjustment Fund-Lobster Initiative and the ShortTerm Transitional Measures Program to help
the industry through the global recession. And
the Atlantic Lobster Sustainability Measures
Program provided support for restructuring and
rationalization, as well as conservation and
stewardship programs to support the long-term
sustainability of the industry.
We’ll continue these efforts.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

fund a new lobster branding initiative to be
carried out in co-operation with the Lobster
Council of Canada. This measure will support
the Council’s work promoting the Canada
Lobster Brand both here at home and in export
markets around the world. We'll also pursue
new markets for Canadian lobster.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will also

work in collaboration with the provinces and
the University of Prince Edward Island’s AVC
Lobster Science Centre to pursue biomass
research, gaining valuable information that will
inform policy decisions affecting the lobster
fishery for years to come.

The actions performed
“thanks
to the Recreational

Fisheries Conservation
Partnerships Program will
enable us to implement
necessary corrective
measures for the recovery
and rehabilitation of fish
habitats to encourage
recreational fisheries and
restore degraded fish
habitats.

”

Regroupement des gestionnaires des ZEC
de la Capitale-Nationale (March 3, 2015).

The Atlantic lobster
“fishery
is the cornerstone

of our industry. This year we
will invest almost $5 million
reaching new markets in
Europe and Asia, improving our
processes and modernizing
our infrastructure. The Prime
Minister has recognized our
investment and commitment
to this industry by making
the same commitment and
investment by the federal
government.

”

Louisbourg Seafoods Limited (September
10, 2015).

99
We’ll also support the Atlantic salmon

fishery by confronting Greenland on the
issue of overfishing Canada’s Atlantic
salmon stock and increasing the harvest
of striped bass to improve the survival of
juvenile Atlantic salmon, following receipt of
an upcoming Department of Fisheries and
Oceans scientific study.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 42

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Our sealing industry is of vital importance to many
coastal communities, in particular among Canada’s
Aboriginal peoples.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to pursue new and expanded markets
for these products, including establishing a
system of certification to demonstrate that
products resulting from Aboriginal hunting meet
European Union standards.

As part of the completion of the Canada-EU Free
Trade Agreement, we've committed to working with
the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
to provide support for those affected by the
elimination of minimum processing requirements
(MPRs) in the fishery sector.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to work with the province to provide
compensation for losses arising from the
gradual elimination of these requirements.
We have set aside $280 million ($93 million
per year over 3 years) for this purpose
which is intended to be matched 70:30 by
the province. In the event that we cannot
reach an agreement with the province to
deliver a joint compensation program, we'll
compensate workers directly who have been
negatively impacted by MPR phase-outs.

43 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Supporting Canada’s forestry
sector and its workers
Our great forests are among the features that
define us most as a country, and our forestry
industry has been a source of prosperity since
before Confederation. Today, the industry
supports more than 200,000 Canadian families,
and contributes $20 billion to our national GDP.
And, we’re proud to say, our industry sets the
gold standard for environmentally-friendly
forest managment. More than 160 million
hectares of Canadian forest are managed
by companies that have been independently
certified for their progressive and sustainable
management practices. In fact, almost half of
all the forests in the world that are managed to
this standard are in Canada – four times more
than our nearest competitor.

44 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

And this hasn’t gone unnoticed. A 2014 survey
of international wood and wood products buyers
found that Canada’s forestry industry had the
best environmental reputation in the world.
Still, there are some groups who continue
to spread falsehoods among our industry’s
customers about Canadian forestry practices,
sabotaging businesses and hurting the
hardworking Canadians who take pride in their
industry. Mills have closed, and Canadians have
lost their jobs because of these actions.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

help Canada’s forestry industry fight back by
establishing a fund to match private-sector
contributions to promote Canadian forestry
products and our sustainable management
practices, and to counter those who are
conducting misinformation campaigns.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

This new commitment builds upon other steps we
intend to take to help support Canada's forestry
sector and its workers:

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to pursue untapped market
opportunities to expand and diversify our
export markets both here in North America
and around the world. This includes
renegotiating an agreement to allow our
softwood lumber exports to enter the United
States market.

99
We’ll continue to encourage the growth and

this budgetary measure,
“theByCanadian
government is

recognizing the forest industry’s major contribution to the
country’s economy. With its
216 500 direct jobs, including
some 60 000 in Quebec,
the industry contributes to
Canada’s GDP to the tune of
nearly 21 billion dollars.

”

Council of Quebec Forest Industry (April 21,
2015).

modernization of the industry through the
Forest Innovation Program, which supports
research and development.

99
And we’ll continue investing in the Forest

Industry Transportation Program, which
supports the development of new technologies
that make our forestry industry more efficient
and more environmentally friendly.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 45

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Expanding new mining
opportunities
Canada is a global leader in the mining sector.
From Yukon's gold to Labrador's iron, the
industry provides almost 400,000 Canadians
across the country with jobs that, for the most
part, are the highest-paying industrial jobs in
the country. It's the main business for 150
communities in rural and northern Canada, and
employs the largest number, proportionally, of
Aboriginal Canadians of any industry.
We're committed to ensuring this vital sector
remains a source of jobs and opportunity for
Canadians for generations to come.
The Mineral Exploration Tax Credit has helped
junior mining companies raise more than $5.5
billion for exploration since 2006. In 2013 alone,
more than 250 companies used the credit to
raise financing from 19,000 individual investors.

46 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will
extend the Mineral Exploration Tax Credit
for three years to support further mining
exploration and investment.

Meanwhile, the development of hundreds of
potential mining projects in this great, vast country
– such as the Ring of Fire in Northern Ontario and
Plan Nord in Quebec – is challenged by the high
cost of working far from transportation routes and
supply centres.
Many of these ventures could be economic
game-changers for the Canadians living in the
surrounding regions.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will
support economic development in these
communities by establishing an enhanced
Mining Exploration Tax Credit for northern
and remote mining projects.

These new commitments build on our current plan
to support Canada's mining sector.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to support jobs and growth in the
mining industry by following through on
our plan to invest further in the Targeted
Geoscience Initiative, to promote increased
mineral exploration by the private sector.

99
We’ll also expand the eligible costs under

the Canadian Exploration Expenses policy
to include environmental studies and
community consultations.

government has
“alsoThemade
some strategic

investments in innovation,
marine safety and infrastructure that should pay dividends
over time. Taken together, the
federal government has maintained investments important to
our sector, but also necessary to
ensure Canadians capitalize
when the commodities
market rebounds.

”

Mining Association of Canada (April 21,
2015).

has long advocated
“forPDAC
the extension of the METC

beyond the historical one-year
commitment, as well as
measures that will address
the high costs of exploration
in northern and remote parts
of the country. As we enter into
a national election, it’s a good
time to focus on important
policies that will help Canada
succeed in the 21st century.
We encourage all political
parties to commit to enhancing
the METC in an effort to ensure
that Canada remains a global
leader in mineral exploration
and development.

”

Prospectors and Developers Association of
Canada (September 2, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 47

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Responsible resource
development
Canada is one of the world's great energy
suppliers, providing the world with everything
from oil and natural gas to coal, uranium,
and biofuels.
Not surprisingly, then, the energy industry is
more than a source of power. Directly and
indirectly providing good jobs for more than
900,000 Canadians, and accounting for
almost one third of our merchandise exports,
it's also a significant source of opportunity
and prosperity.
But even those who don't make a living in the
energy industry benefit in real, substantial
ways from its success. It contributes billions
of dollars every year that governments spend
on the programs and services that Canadians
depend upon.

48 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to support this crucial
industry, and the many Canadians who
depend on it for their livelihoods. This
means not interfering in the independent
project review process, and making final
decisions on individual projects based
on the science and recommendations of
expert bodies.

Canada is home to vast reserves of natural
gas, a resource that holds immense potential
for jobs and growth for generations to come
if it can be exported to meet the ever-growing
demands of countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
The most efficient way to do this is to transport
it in liquefied form, which means establishing
facilities to process our natural gas for shipping.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

follow through with its plan to support the
creation of a Liquefied Natural Gas industry,
helping investors meet their start-up costs
by offering an accelerated Capital Cost
Allowance on machinery and equipment
used in processing facilities.

Our Government has a strong record of co-funding
investments in pre-commercial clean technology
projects to help bring them to market. These
investments are good for the environment and
good for our economy.

for LNG] is great news
“for[ACCA
the creation of LNG jobs in
British Columbia, and great
news for Canada …. We have
been working with the federal
government and industry for
some time to achieve this
outcome, and I am pleased
they have delivered...

”

Christy Clark, Premier of British Columbia
(February 19, 2015).

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to support Sustainable
Development Technology Canada’s work to
finance the development and demonstration
of new, clean technologies that create
efficiencies for businesses and contribute to
sustainable economic development.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 49

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Building economic
infrastructure
The founders of Confederation bound our
country together with a great railway because
they knew a country of this size could not
function without significant investments
in infrastructure. It's no different today.
From highways, airports and harbours to
subways, bridges and community facilities,
infrastructure projects create good jobs for
tens of thousands of Canadians, drive our
economy, improve our quality of life, and
connect us to each other.
More than 95 percent of Canada’s core
public infrastructure is owned by provinces,
territories, and municipalities but, since 2006,
our Conservative Government has made a
historic commitment to supporting public
infrastructure across the country. We promised
in 2006 “a better approach to fixing Canada’s
infrastructure deficit,” and we've delivered.
50 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Federal support for infrastructure has increased
dramatically under our Government. Annual
federal funding has increased from $571 million
a decade ago to over $5 billion this year. And
we have launched the largest, longest-running
infrastructure program in Canadian history.
Altogether, our investments in infrastructure
for the years 2013-2023 will total almost
$85 billion. This level of investment is without
precedent, and we've accomplished it while
bringing the budget back into balance and
lowering taxes.
Infrastructure is also key to trade, and Canadian
products need modern infrastructure to travel
efficiently to their final destinations at home
and abroad. Our Government has made historic
investments in improving our trade-oriented
infrastructure such as ports, harbours, and rail.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Improvements include major projects at Port
Metro Vancouver, the Port of Quebec, the Port of
Montreal, the Saint John Harbour Bridge, and the
new Gordie Howe International Bridge between
Windsor and Detroit.
A re-elected Conservative Government will continue
to support important economic investments such
as these across the country.

transit investment in
“thisThebudget
is good news

for Canadians and marks an
important achievement on a
key issue they face.

”

Federation of Canadian Municipalities
(April 21, 2015).

99
We’ll launch the Quebec Maritime Prosperity

Initiative to fund maritime and port
infrastructure – including improvements to
facilities for cruise ships and tall ships, such
as the Quai Alexandra terminal in Montreal,
the Ross Gaudreault terminal in Quebec City,
and the restoration of Champlain – Foulon
sector promenade.

99
We’ll fund key Asia-Pacific Gateway

projects in Western Canada to strengthen
our transport system and help Canadian
businesses, including our farmers, get their
products to market.

99
And we’ll support major public transit

projects – such as Smart Track in the
Greater Toronto Area, Light Rail Transit in
Surrey and Ottawa, and Calgary’s Green Line
– to fight gridlock, reduce travel times for
commuters and businesses, and support new
economic development.

Governing is about making choices. We have
chosen to keep taxes low, balance the books, and
invest in infrastructure because we know that
these things are good for our economy and good
for Canadians.

99
A re-elected Conservative government will

continue to invest in core public infrastructure,
to keep our economy moving forward, and to
make life easier and better for Canadians.

High-speed internet access is not just a qualityof-life issue – it’s critical infrastructure that
contributes to business investment, job creation,
and, ultimately, economic development in rural and
remote parts of our country.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 51

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

“

The commitment announced
today demonstrates real
progress on a key issue for
municipalities, in particular
rural and remote communities….If implemented, this
pledge has the potential to
improve the quality of
broadband services in these
regions by expanding access to
fibre-based internet services.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities
(August 26, 2015).

”

52 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Our Conservative Government has put significant
effort and investments into extending high-speed
broadband access to all Canadians. Our goal is to
ensure that 98 percent of Canadian households
have high-speed internet service by 2017, and
we’re on track to meet this target.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will build on our record of expanding rural
internet access by funding high-capacity
backbone – such as fibre optic cable
networks or satellite – in hundreds of
communities across the country, allowing
people and businesses in northern and
rural communities to access the internet at
speeds currently enjoyed by Canadians in
larger urban centres.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Supporting Northern
economic development
Canadians are a northern people; winter
blows through our stories, our songs, and our
sports. And the Arctic itself is a key element of
our national identity. Its exploration, by great
heroes like Sir John Franklin, is our history. Its
vast geography is our present. And its limitless
promise is our future.
One of the challenges of living in Canada’s north
is the high cost of healthy food. The great distance
between major shipping hubs and some of our
most remote communities drives up prices,
making feeding a family a much more expensive
undertaking than in the rest of the country.
Our Conservative Government is committed to
helping people in Northern communities enjoy
the kind of healthy diet all Canadians enjoy, and
has invested significantly in the Nutrition North
program, which subsidizes the cost of food
shipped to communities in northern Canada.
53 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

But the program can be improved.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

require that all retailers have a point-of-sale
system for the Nutrition North program so
that Northern customers can clearly see on
their grocery receipts how and when the
Nutrition North subsidy is applied.

99
We’ll also extend the Nutrition North

Program to 40 additional communities.

A key part of Canada’s Northern Strategy
is the devolution of power related to lands
and resources to northern governments. In
Yukon and the Northwest Territories, which
have reached agreements with the federal
government to achieve this, significant prosperity,
growth and opportunity have followed.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

But devolution isn’t just about economic success
– it’s about giving the people of the North more
say in their own future, and greater control over
their own destiny.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

commit to completing the devolution of land
and resource powers to the Government of
Nunavut over the next four years.

A strong and prosperous North is key to a
strong and prosperous Canada. This is why
our Government has worked hard to promote
economic development in the North through an
unprecedented number of important investments
in infrastructure, including airports, marine
facilities, and roads.
These investments benefit Northerners in real and
significant ways. First, making it more efficient to
transport goods brings down prices, and lower
prices make it easier to live, work and raise
a family in the North. Second, investments in
infrastructure create new jobs and opportunities
for Northerners.

The Advisory Board deter“mined
that showing the

Nutrition North Canada
subsidy savings on the
sales receipt is an important
and needed step to show
clear transparency. We are
encouraged that retailers
have taken on the challenge,
and that the Minister supports
our recommendations. We
remain committed to making
a difference for Northerners
and their families.

”

Nellie Cournoyea, Vice Chair, Nutrition
North Canada Advisory Board

Better infrastructure also improves Northerners’
quality of life by making it easier and safer to
get around.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

build on its record of infrastructure investment
by improving the section of Highway 5 running
through Wood Buffalo National Park and
connecting Hay River to Fort Smith, NWT –
widening it, replacing drainage culverts, and
hard-surfacing the last 68-kilometre stretch
that currently remains a gravel road.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to support the Strategic Investments
in Northern Economic Development program
to finance economic development projects in
the territories.

99
And we’ll also continue to support the

Northern Project Management Office to foster
a more stable and attractive investment
climate for resource development in the
territories.
Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 54

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

AT RISK
Our low-tax, balanced budget plan has protected
Canada’s economy in the face of global economic
turmoil. Canada’s economic growth and job-creation
record has been world-leading but conditions
remain fragile and external risks threaten our
financial security. Now is not the time to take our
country in the wrong direction – a direction we know
would expose our fragile economy, cost Canadians
money, and put their jobs at risk.
Given the chance, the Liberals and NDP would
expose Canada’s fragile economy by:
Raising general taxes on job-creating
businesses by billions of dollars.
Hiking payroll taxes on small businesses by
billions more.
Imposing billions of dollars in carbon taxes on
Canadian businesses that will put them at a
major competitive disadvantage and raise the
price of everything for Canadian consumers.
Abandoning efforts to open up new markets
for Canadian products.
Blocking resource development so that
Canada’s energy resources will stay in the
ground instead of being developed responsibly
to generate investment and jobs.
Siding with environmental special interest
groups at the expense of Canada’s forestry
and mining sectors and their workers.
Re-establishing the Canadian Wheat Board
monopoly to limit choice and opportunity for
Western grain farmers.
Running up budget deficits and accumulating
significant new debt that will undermine investor
confidence, set Canada’s economy back, and
impose a heavy burden on future generations.

55 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

  

 

 

 

 

0c.? 
mom 
>20 mmZ_Omm

 

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

To protect our economy and help
families, a re-elected Conservative
Government will:
Establish a new, permanent Home
Renovation Tax Credit
Increase the First-Time Home Buyers’ Plan
by 40 percent
Aim to add over 700,000 new
homeowners by 2020
Double grants for low- and middle-income
families saving for their children’s education
Provide new tax relief for single and
widowed seniors
Expand grants for families with
disabled children

Families are the bedrock of our communities, and,
by extension, our country. When families thrive,
Canada thrives. It's always been our goal to make
Canada the best country in the world in which to
raise a family.
Now raising a family is hard work, and we believe
it’s work best left to the experts: Mom and Dad. We
believe that in a Canada of low taxes, good jobs,
safe streets and the opportunity to prosper, they
can do the rest – and that's what we're delivering.
That's why, when it comes to taxes, our
Conservative Government is committed to taking
as little as possible, and giving back as much as
we can – especially to lower- and middle-income
families. In fact, the federal tax burden is now at
the lowest level in over 50 years.

57 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

This principle has been at the heart of our
Conservative Government’s agenda since taking
office. It’s why we:

99
Lowered the GST from seven to six to five
percent.

99
Established, and then enhanced, the monthly
Universal Child-Care Benefit.

99
Provided tax relief for families who put their
children in sports and arts programs.

99
Granted tax relief for scholarships, bursaries,
and textbooks to Canadian students.

99
Extended tax relief for public transit users.
99
Brought in Pension Income Splitting and other
new tax relief for Canadian seniors.

99
Enacted and expanded Tax-Free Savings
Accounts.

99
Introduced the $2,000 Family Tax Cut for
families with children.

As a result of our Conservative plan, the typical
Canadian family now has more than $6,600 in their
pockets every year – real benefits, real relief, that
they can count on.
We understand the financial pressure that families
face, and we’re focused on helping these families
make ends meet. Our plan leaves every family
with children with more money in their pockets to
spend on their priorities, and the long-term financial
security to pursue those priorities with confidence.
We want every family to succeed, and we'll help by
lowering their taxes and giving them the freedom
to choose what's best for them.
And that’s what a re-elected Conservative
Government will continue to do.

99
We’ll pass legislation imposing a “tax lock” on

increases to federal income tax rates and sales
tax rates, and discretionary payroll taxes over
the next four years. This pledge backs our lowtax commitment with the force of the law.
Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 58

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

The
family
The
family
home
home
For most Canadians, the family home is
their biggest asset and their most significant
investment in their future financial security. It’s
also the focus of their lives – where they raise
their children, relax with friends and family, and
enjoy their golden years.
That’s why our Conservative Government
believes it’s vitally important to help Canadians
become homeowners, to help them maintain and
increase the value of their homes, and to make
changes through renovations as their needs and
circumstances evolve.
Our plan for affordable, responsible
homeownership is working. Canada now has one
of the highest homeownership rates in the world
and exceeds that of the United States for the first
time in decades. Homeownership is a key way
to support Canadian families. And there's more
we can do to help aspiring homeowners buy and
invest in their homes.
59 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

set a target to add more than 700,000
new homeowners by 2020. If this goal for
affordable, responsible homeownership is
reached, we'll see the number of Canadian
homeowners exceed 10 million.

The Home Buyers’ Plan allows aspiring
homeowners to make tax-free withdrawals from
their Registered Retirement Savings Plans to
finance the purchase or new construction of their
first home. In 2009, our Conservative Government
increased the allowable withdrawal from $20,000
to $25,000 – the first increase since the program
was established a generation earlier. This has
become an important method of financing for firsttime homeowners, benefiting almost 200,000
Canadians a year.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

raise the Home Buyers’ Plan limit once again,
from $25,000 to $35,000. With this increase
we will continue to help families achieve the
pride and stability of having a place to call
their own.

The Home Renovation Tax Credit, originally
established by our Government in 2009 as a
temporary measure, was a resounding success.
About one in every three households took
advantage of this program, saving more than three
million Canadians, on average, more than $700
each. It also pumped $4.3 billion into our national
economy, in tough economic times.

99
It was such a success story – so good for

Canadian families, and so good for the
Canadian economy – that a re-elected
Conservative Government will enact a new
permanent Home Renovation Tax Credit,
available each year for substantial home
renovation expenses up to $2,500, beginning
in January 2017, and $5,000, beginning in
January 2019.

Given the importance of homeownership, our
Government wants to make sure it remains a
dream within reach for the average Canadian
family. Some reports have suggested that
speculative foreign non-resident buyers are a
significant factor in driving homes out of the price
range of average families, especially in Vancouver
and Toronto. If speculators are driving up the cost
of housing to unaffordable levels, that’s something
the government can and should address. Other
countries, like Australia, have put in place
regulations that limit the ability of foreign buyers to
purchase existing houses for investment purposes.

The Home Buyers’ Plan has
“helped
so many Canadian
families realize their dream
of home ownership. Today’s
commitment to increase the
withdrawal limit of the HBP
will ensure that the dream
stays within reach for today’s
young people.

”

Canadian Real Estate Association
(August 12, 2015).

We are glad that the
“importance
of home renovation
to the Canadian economy has
been introduced into the election campaign. A permanent
tax credit is sound policy for
all Canadians, helping
homeowners protect and add
value to their homes, while
also addressing the chronic
problem of the underground
‘cash’ economy in home
renovations and repairs.

”

Canadian Home Builders Association
(August 4, 2015).

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will compile comprehensive data on the
acquisition of Canadian real estate by foreign
non-residents and temporary residents, and,
if this is contributing to putting the dream of
homeownership out of reach of Canadians,
we’ll work in coordination with provincial
governments to take the appropriate action.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 60

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

Saving
The family
for a child’s
education
home
Part of ensuring Canadian children get the best
possible start in life is helping their parents begin
saving for their future education.
Our Conservative Government has a solid record of
making it easier for families to save and prepare for
their children's education, including providing tax
relief on scholarships and bursaries, and targeting
student grants to low- and middle-income students.
One of the ways we've helped families is
through Registered Education Savings Plans.
These plans allow Canadians to invest money
tax-free until it’s time to pay that first tuition
bill. Because we realize how important this is,
our Conservative Government has contributed
significantly to Canadian families’ RESPs,
through matching grants.

61 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

In 2014, we helped 2.59 million children invest
in their future, including 900,000 children from
low- and middle-income families who received
enhanced, targeted grants.
But we want to help even more.
A re-elected Conservative Government will:

99
Double the enhanced grant for middle-

income families from 10 cents to 20 cents
per dollar on the first $500 contributed
each year.

99
Double the enhanced grant for lower-

income families from 20 cents to 40 cents
per dollar on the first $500 contributed
each year.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

These enhancements could mean as much as
$2,200 more per student or roughly a half year’s
tuition costs in additional government support,
assuming a reasonable rate of return.
This new commitment builds on policies in our
Economic Action Plan 2015 that will make life
easier and more affordable for post-secondary
students and their families including:

99
Eliminating in-study income from the Canada
Student Loans Program assessment so that
students can work, earn money, and gain
valuable experience while studying without
affecting their loan eligibility – helping
87,000 students per year.

Canada’s post-secondary
“students
are welcoming
extensive new measures in
the 2015 federal budget
that will enhance access to
post-secondary education
and improve long-term
employment prospects for
Canadian youth.

”

Canadian Alliance of Student
Associations (April 21, 2015).

99
Reducing the expected parental

contributions from the Canada Student Loans
Program assessment to better recognize the
financial realities faced by Canadian families
– increasing support to approximately
92,000 students.

99
Expanding the number of low- and middle-

income students eligible for the Canada
Student Grant program by making these
grants applicable to short-term, vocational
programs.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 62

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

Saving
The family
for a secure
retirement
home
Canadians know the value of saving, whether
it's for a car, for college or university, for a family
vacation, or just for a rainy day. And we believe
in encouraging Canadians to save, which is why
we’ve expanded significantly their ability to do so.
No two families are exactly alike, and imposing a
one-size-fits-all approach to saving would be wrong
for Canada and wrong for Canadians. Instead,
we’re making it easier for Canadians to save
money in whatever way works best for them and
their families. We want all Canadians to be able to
dream big, knowing their hard-earned money will
be there for them when they need it.
Saving for retirement is major priority for
Canadians. That’s why our Conservative
Government has consistently lowered taxes to
leave Canadians with more take-home pay and
expanded the range of voluntary options for
them to save for their future.
63 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Tax-Free Savings Accounts (TFSAs) have become
the single most important personal savings
vehicle in decades. Nearly 11 million Canadians
have opened an account and the total value
of assets held is about $120 billion. Low- and
middle-income Canadians have have benefited
significantly – about half of TFSA holders earned
less than $42,000. Put simply: TFSAs have
become a place where almost one in three
Canadians keep and grow their dreams.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

protect the TFSA and the recent doubling
of the annual contribution limit to $10,000
per year.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

We'll also take further steps to help Canadians
save for retirement and to lower taxes on Canadian
seniors by:

99
Giving seniors significantly greater flexibility
in managing their retirement income
by reducing the minimum withdrawal
requirements for Registered Retirement
Income Funds.

99
Raising the Lifetime Capital Gains Exemption
from $500,000 to 750,000 to $800,000
and indexing it. We'll raise it to $1 million
for farmers and fishermen to help them with
succession planning and their retirement.

99
Consulting with Canadians on how

to supplement the range of savings
options with voluntary Canada
Pension Plan contributions.

improved outcomes for
“olderTheCanadians
resulted from
far more than government
policymaking. Canadians,
as individuals, have shown
good judgement in managing
their retirement, drawing on
resources both inside and
outside the formal pension
system.

”

Former Statistics Canada economist
Philip Cross (April 2014).

of CARP members
“areTwo-thirds
in favour of increasing the

Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA)
contribution limit. The support
for increasing the TFSA limit is
rooted in concern for adequate
retirement income, and any
measure that encourages it is
favoured, the organization says.
TFSAs have particular value
for retirees who can no longer
contribute to RRSPs and for
lower-income earners who do
not benefit as much from tax-deductible RRSP contributions.
CARP (February 27, 2015).

”

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 64

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

Tax
Therelief
familyfor single and
widowed
home
seniors
Canadian seniors have earned our gratitude
for a lifetime of hard work in service to our
families, our communities, and our country.
They have helped make Canada the strong and
prosperous country that it is today, and they
deserve to enjoy their senior years in dignity
and financial security.
Our Conservative Government has cut taxes
and is making life more affordable for Canadian
seniors, including single and widowed seniors.
We’ve:

99
Introduced Tax-Free Savings Accounts

(TFSAs), which 2.7 million Canadian
have now opened. Income earned and
withdrawals from TFSAs don’t affect
eligibility for the Age Credit, Old Age
Security, and the Guaranteed Income
Supplement.

65 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Enhanced the TFSA in 2015 to allow

Canadians to contribute up to $10,000
each year, with seniors to receive 60
percent of the benefits from this new
contribution limit.

99
Enacted Pension Income Splitting for

seniors to benefit more than 2.2 million
Canadian seniors each year, with average
federal tax relief of $900 annually.

99
Improved the rules for Registered

Retirement Income Funds to allow seniors
to preserve more of their retirement
savings.

99
Increased the Age Credit amount by

$2,000, to provide up to $1,055 in annual
tax relief for seniors.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

99
Announced the biggest increases in a
generation to the Guaranteed Income
Supplement to help Canada’s most
vulnerable seniors.

99
Doubled, to $2,000, the maximum amount of

income eligible for the Pension Income Credit.

99
Created, in 2015, a new, permanent Home

Accessibility Tax Credit for seniors that
provides up to $1,500 in tax relief each year.

The results of our low-tax, balanced budget plan for
Canada’s seniors are clear.

99
Since 2006, we have cut taxes on Canadian
seniors by $3 billion each and every year.

99
Almost 400,000 seniors have been removed
from the tax rolls completely.

99
And now a single senior can earn at least

$20,360 and a senior couple at least $40,720
before paying any federal income tax.

Yet single and widowed seniors are among Canada’s
most vulnerable citizens and face unique financial
challenges. The cost of living can be high for single
seniors living on a fixed income. And when a senior
becomes widowed, he or she can lose access to
some benefits their spouse received and can face
difficult financial circumstances as a result.

99
In response, a re-elected Conservative

Government will establish an “equivalent-tospouse” Pension Income Credit for single and
widowed seniors. This $2,000 Single Seniors
Tax Credit will extend tax relief to nearly 1.6
million single and widowed seniors.

Through this new tax relief, our Conservative
Government is making an affordable, targeted
commitment to Canada’s single seniors, who
deserve our respect and financial support.

This new tax relief will bring
“fairness
for single seniors.

Some of our members have told
us that because they are single
they are unable to get tax
relief by splitting their pension
income for tax purposes like
their married friends. Single
seniors, usually women, will
welcome this news, especially
those who are caring for a
dependant such as an adult
child or parent.

”

Susan Eng, Executive VP, CARP
(September 15, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 66

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

Help
The family
for Canadians
with
homedisabilities
The moms and dads who care for a child with
a disability make incredible sacrifices and carry
tremendous workloads in the name of love. For
these families, making sure a loved one with a
disability is financially secure is a real concern.
We have a responsibility to help ensure that their
kids lead lives as fulfilling as any other Canadian.
That’s why, in 2008, thanks to the vision of the
late Jim Flaherty, our Conservative Government
established Registered Disability Savings Plans.
These plans allow the families of children with
disabilities, and those children themselves as
they grow up, to set aside money for the future
in a place where it can grow with them, tax-free,
until it’s needed.
Canadians have opened nearly 105,000 of
these accounts since then – and through the
Canada Disability Savings Grant and the Canada
Disability Savings Bond programs, we’ve added
more than $1 billion to their savings.
67 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

But we can do more.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will increase the maximum annual grant
for low- and middle-income families from
$3,500 to $4,000. This means that these
families will now receive a matching grant
of $4 for every $1 contributed, on the first
$500 they contribute each year.

99
We’ll also continue to work with the

provinces and Canada’s financial institutions
to improve the administration of the RDSP
program, and to expand the range of
investment options for RDSP holders.

We’ll take these additional steps because when
your loved one’s future is financially secure,
you’re better able to focus on the important
things that matter in the present.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

This measure builds on our record of helping
Canadians with disabilities fulfill their potential.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to support our three-year
partnership with the Canadian Association
of Community Living to help connect people
with developmental disabilities with jobs.

99
We'll also continue our four-year partnership

with the Sinneave Family Foundation and
Autism Speaks Canada to expand vocational
training programs for people with Autism
Spectrum Disorder.

99
And we'll continue to support the Autism

Spectrum Disorder Working Group’s work to
develop a Canadian Autism Partnership. We'll
be ready to support the initiative in areas of
federal jurisdiction once the development
work is complete.

Jim Flaherty designed the
“RDSP
with elegant simplici-

ty….In effect, Jim Flaherty is
the first Canadian politician
to say, ‘I trust people with
disabilities to make the right
decisions with their money.’
He was right…Jim Flaherty
understood because he was
the father of a son with a
disability. I believe this fuelled
his determination to leap over
out-of-date mentalities toward
people with disabilities….He
was making it better up until
his last budget.

”

Al Etmanski, “Thanks to Jim Flaherty,
disabled Canadian can fulfill their
dreams,” Globe and Mail (April 16, 2014).

thank the leaders
“whoWecollaborated
across the

country to advance the
Canadian Autism Partnership.
CASDA and its members
applaud the Government of
Canada, with special thanks
to Prime Minister Harper,
Minister Oliver and Honourable
Mike Lake, M.P, in investing
and recognizing the importance
of a united approach to address
the unique needs of the
Canadian autism community.
Canadian Autism Spectrum Disorder
Alliance April 2015).

”

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 68

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

The
family
Supporting
every
family
home
Families come in different shapes and sizes
and have different needs. Our Conservative
Government has consistently supported all
families – we think that’s real fairness.
This support includes adoptive families. About
3,000 children are adopted in Canada every year
but, at any given time, there are about 30,000
children within this country alone in need of
stable homes filled with love, and thousands
of Canadian families waiting to invite them into
their hearts and lives.
We recognize that adoption costs can be high
and in some cases prohibitive for families. That’s
why we’ve:

99
Expanded the Adoption Expense
Tax Credit.

99
Extended EI parental benefits to foster
parents who choose to adopt.

69 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Cut backlogs and wait times for adopted

children as part of our immigration reforms.

We’ll continue to support adoptive families in
giving children a loving home.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will increase our support for these caring
Canadians, by increasing the amount
eligible for the Adoption Expense Tax Credit
from $15,000 to $20,000 per child, and by
making this tax credit fully refundable.

The birth of a new baby is an exciting time for
all involved, especially moms and dads. It’s also
a period of tremendous change for parents as
they adjust their work and home lives to the new
responsibilities of parenthood.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

Our Conservative Government wants to support
parents during this critically important period.
Increasing job flexibility is one way to support
moms and dads who want to spend as much time
as possible with their babies as they grow and
take their first steps. Some parents also see the
transition to parenthood as a good time to pursue
their entrepreneurial instincts. That's why a reelected Conservative Government will:

99
Expand Employment Insurance maternity and

parental benefits and federal leave provisions
to increase flexibility for new parents and
encourage those with self-employment goals.

99
New parents in federally regulated sectors

will be provided with job protection to care
for a baby up to 18 months of age, allowing
workers to take up to 6 months of additional
unpaid leave.

99
Parents can opt to receive their EI parental

benefits at the full rate for up to 35 weeks, or
they can extend those payments at a lesser
rate up to a maximum of 61 weeks. When
combined with other EI maternity leave, this
can provide parents with a stream of income
for 18 months while caring for their babies.

99
A new two-year pilot project will be

established to allow parents to earn selfemployment income, without impacting EI
maternity or parental benefits, up to 100% of
the weekly EI maximum insurable earnings
threshold.

99
Women receiving EI maternity benefits will

also be able to earn employment income
under the Working While on Claim pilot
project. This is currently permitted for those
receiving EI parental benefits.

We’ll also continue to support choice in childcare
and help families make whatever arrangements
are right for them. This is the underlying basis for
our monthly Universal Child Care Benefit and our
other support for childcare including the Child Care
Expense Deduction.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 70

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

“

Good announcement Prime
Minister Harper, thanks for
listening to Saskatchewan’s
concerns. More money in
pockets of ALL families with
kids… To clarify, all families
with kids will see a $720/
year increase to Universal
Child Tax Benefit, regardless
of income or marital status.
That's good.

”

Brad Wall, Saskatchewan Premier (October 30, 2014).

[The Society] applauds the
“government
for extending

compassionate care benefits in
today’s federal budget, calling it
a critical step towards ensuring
family caregivers in Canada get
the financial support they need.
The Canadian Cancer Society
congratulates the government
for this important commitment
which will make the lives of
family caregivers easier.

”

Canadian Cancer Society (April 21, 2015).

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

implement our plan to increase the Child Care
Expense Deduction by $1,000, beginning this
year. This means that the maximum amount
that can be claimed will increase to $8,000
from $7,000 for children under age seven, to
$5,000 from $4,000 for children aged seven
through 16, and to $11,000 from $10,000 for
children with disabilities.

99
And, of course, we’ll continue to maintain

our Universal Child Care Benefit that
provides monthly cheques to all parents, up
to nearly $2,000 per year for children under
age 6, and more than $700 per year for
children aged 6 to 17.

Families help each other. Sometimes Canadians are
called upon to care for a gravely ill family member.
Such situations can be challenging financially, and
no one should ever have to choose between caring
for a loved one and keeping their job.
Our Conservative Government has taken several
steps to help families faced with a family health
crisis such as enacting the Family Caregiver Tax
Credit and establishing a special 35-week benefit
for parents with critically ill children.
But there is more to be done. When a family
member is gravely ill and needs care, Canadians
should be free to focus on caring for their loved
ones without the added stress of worrying about
their financial security.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

carry out our plan to extend the Employment
Insurance Compassionate Care Benefits period
from six weeks to six months.

71 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

The
family
Protecting
consumers
home
Canadians work hard for their money and rightly
expect, as consumers, to be treated fairly when it
comes to matters of quality, safety and choice.
We’re committed to ensuring that they are.
A re-elected Conservative Government will proceed
with several measures to protect consumers’
wallets, and their health and safety. We’ll:

99
Pass legislation that allows the Minister

of Transport to issue motor-vehicle recalls
and to demand that manufacturers repair
defective vehicles as required, as well as
levy significant fines on manufacturers
and importers who do not comply.

99
Continue to take action to create greater
consumer choice in the wireless sector,
so that Canadians can enjoy lower prices
and improved quality when it comes to
cellphones, tablets, and wi-fi services.

72 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Pass legislation to grant the federal

Competition Commissioner the authority
to investigate geographic differences
in prices, with the intent of reducing
the “price gap” between Canadian and
American consumer goods.

99
Move forward with comprehensive

legislation to protect consumers in
financial transactions. This will include
banning “pay to pay” practices, in which
financial institutions charge their customers
a fee for making payments on their
mortgages, credit cards, or other loans.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

99
Continue our efforts to assess and manage

the risks posed to the health of Canadian
families and our environment by new or
existing chemical substances. This will
include listing microbeads as a toxic
substance under the Environmental Protection
Act, effectively banning them in Canada.

Our Government in 2014 passed Vanessa’s
Law, named after the daughter of Member of
Parliament Terence Young. Vanessa died of a heart
attack while taking a prescription drug that was
later found to be unsafe for human consumption,
and Terence spent the next 14 years working
tirelessly to ensure that this law became his
daughter’s legacy.
Vanessa’s Law is historic legislation that gives
the Government stronger powers to force drug
recalls, imposes new penalties on companies that
market unsafe products, requires that health risks
be made clear in product labelling, and requires
health-care institutions to report serious reactions
to prescription drugs.

99
Still, Vanessa’s Law could go further. For

example, we should impose on health-care
institutions a more comprehensive, standardized
reporting regime when documenting such
reactions. A re-elected Conservative Government
will move forward with making this important
legislation even more effective at protecting
Canadian families.

These measures build on our past record of
standing up for consumers, including:

99
Supporting Canada’s broadcast regulator in

I'm proud of the great
“strides
our Government has

taken to improve drug safety
for Canadians. It's great that
we are asking Canadians
what information they need
access to, and making it clear
to industry what's expected
of them. This will definitely
reduce adverse drug reactions
and help ensure Canadians
take prescription drugs more
safely.

”

Terence Young, Member of Parliament
(April 2, 2015).

compelling satellite and cable companies to
“unbundle” TV channels, so that Canadians
no longer have to pay for channels they
don’t want.

99
Removing the GST from feminine
hygiene products.

99
And continuing to oppose any new “Netflix
tax” on on-demand video services.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 73

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS

AT RISK
Our Conservative Government has worked hard to
make life easier for Canadians. Taxes are lower.
Benefits are higher. And Canadian families have
more freedom than ever before to choose their own
path to prosperity. We know that no two families are
alike, but all families have this in common: Given
the opportunity, they’ll make the choices that are
right for them. The other parties don’t share our
optimism, nor our faith in the sound instincts and
common sense of our fellow Canadians.
Given the chance, the Liberals and NDP would
put the financial security of Canadian families in
jeopardy by:
Running large deficits and raising taxes that
will leave our fragile economy exposed, cost
families money, and put jobs at risk.
Eliminating the Family Tax Cut which is
providing up to $2,000 in tax relief for 1.7
million families.
Taking away the monthly Universal Child-Care
Benefit which is providing nearly $2,000
per year for children under age 6, and more
than $700 per year for children aged 6 to 17.
The UCCB goes to all the nearly four million
families with children.
Shutting down in part or in whole Tax-Free
Savings Accounts which are helping 11
million Canadians save and grow their
savings tax-free.
Cancelling Pension Income Splitting which is
providing over $1 billion in tax relief to more
than 1 million senior couples.
Hiking payroll taxes – as much as $1,000
per year for someone making $60,000 – on
Canadian workers.
Driving up the price of everything Canadian
families buy, including gasoline, groceries,
and home heating fuel, by imposing carbon
pricing schemes on the Canadian economy.

74 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

  

 

0c.? 
mom _<_Omm mmocmm 

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

To keep Canadians safe and
secure, a re-elected Conservative
Government will:
Enact “Declared Areas” legislation to
prosecute foreign fighters
Continue to participate in the broad
international coalition against ISIS
Support persecuted religious minorities
around the world
Defend Canada's Northern sovereignty
Expand Canada’s Reserves and Special
Operations Forces

Our Conservative Government understands that
protecting Canadians’ physical security is as
important as protecting their financial security.
The two ultimately go hand-in-hand. We can’t
have a strong economy if Canadian communities
aren’t safe and secure. And we can’t have real
security if we don’t have the means to pay for
our law enforcement agencies or our military.
A strong economy, then, is the basis for our
prosperity and our security.
We'll continue to vigorously pursue an antiterrorism agenda that seeks to disrupt and
undermine radical jihadism in cooperation with
the countries who share our values. In addition
to Canada’s military participation in the global
coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy the socalled Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, we
are taking strong action against terrorism at home.

76 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

We'll also continue to follow a principled foreign
policy and stand up for what's right rather than
what's popular. In a dangerous and unstable
world, we need a government that recognizes
risks to Canadian interests and our security and
speaks with clarity. And we’ve done that. Prime
Minister Stephen Harper has been a leader on
a wide range of global issues including standing
up for Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression,
defending Israel’s right to exist as a Jewish state
and to defend itself, and speaking out against the
persecution of religious minorities and women
and girls around the world.
And it’s why we’ve ensured that the Canadian
Armed Forces have the equipment and
resources they need to protect and defend our
security. We’ve made significant investments in
Canada’s military following the Liberal “Decade
of Darkness”. We owe the men and women
of the Canadian Armed Forces our unyielding
gratitude and respect, and we’ll continue to
make sure that they have the resources to get
the job done.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue its efforts to protect the security of
Canada and Canadians at home and abroad.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 77

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Combating jihadi
terrorism
When the global terrorist movement threatens
Canada and Canadians not just abroad, but at
home, that is when we most need moral clarity
and tough leadership. We need to confront and
address this threat and call it what it is – a
force for evil that seeks to undermine our way
of life and the values we hold dear. This clarity
and determination to act to protect our country
has been at the heart of our counter-terrorism
measures here at home.

99
Our Conservative Government released

Canada’s first Counter-terrorism Strategy
in 2012, Building Resilience Against
Terrorism, designed to counter domestic
and international terrorism and protect
Canadians and Canadian interests.

78 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
In 2013, the Combating Terrorism Act

made it a criminal offence to leave or
attempt to leave Canada for the purposes
of participating in or facilitating terrorist
activity.

99
In 2014, the Citizenship Act was amended
to enable the government to revoke
Canadian citizenship from dual citizens
and deny it to permanent residents who
are convicted of terrorism, high treason,
treason or spying offences.

99
The Protection of Canada from Terrorists

Act of 2015 gives the Canadian Security
Intelligence Service the tools it needs
to investigate threats to the security of
Canada and ensure our collective safety.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

99
The 2015 Anti-terrorism Act ensures that

Canadian law enforcement and national
security agencies can effectively investigate
and counter those who promote terrorism
and take part in terrorist activities, prevent
terrorist travel by air and the efforts of those
who seek to use Canada as a recruiting
ground, and disrupt planned attacks on
Canadian soil.

Sadly – and inexplicably, to most Canadians – a
small number of young Canadians choose to
turn their backs on our country, our values, and
all the opportunities that living here brings, and
travel abroad to connect with known terrorist
organizations. Some participate in the atrocities
these groups carry out in foreign lands; others seek
to plot and commit similar horrors on Canadian
soil. Canadians expect real action on the part of
the government to prevent such attacks.
We need to protect Canadians here by making sure
the “foreign fighters” who travel to parts of the
world where terrorists hold sway are not allowed,
on their return to Canada, to act on the warped
ideologies and deadly skills they've learned.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

introduce “Declared Areas” legislation,
allowing the Minister of Foreign Affairs to
identify any part of the world where terrorists
are active as a “no-go” zone for Canadians
without legitimate business there. Travel to
designated zones would become a serious
offence, carrying a significant prison term,
and would allow Canadian authorities to
arrest and detain foreign fighters upon their
attempted return to Canada.

To counter terrorism and youth radicalization in
Canada through research and education, our
Government launched the Kanishka Project in
2011. Funded projects identify factors that build
community resilience and help youth to resist
violent extremism.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 79

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to address the growing problem of
terrorist radicalization and violent extremism
among Canadian youth by renewing funding for
the Kanishka Project for another five years.

Treason, one of the oldest and most serious crimes
on the books, has evolved since it was first codified
into English law in the 14th century. Originally an
attack against the reigning monarch, it came to
encompass turning against one’s own state.
Now, in the 21st century we are witnessing the
alarming emergence of a new form of treason.
“Foreign fighters” who are mostly young men,
including some Canadians, abandon life in the
West to join global jihadi groups abroad in their war
against our country and our allies.
Canadians see this as a betrayal of our most deeply
held values and, indeed, as an attack on all of us.
There is no greater crime than the betrayal of one’s
fellow citizens, and our laws need to reflect this.

99
Our current laws call for life in prison for

anyone convicted of High Treason. A re-elected
Conservative Government will modernize the
definition of High Treason to include fighting
against the Canadian Armed Forces alongside
jihadist terror groups.

80 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

The fight against
ISIS
The so-called Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
– or ISIS – is the greatest threat to Canadian
security today. It wages war daily on everything
we hold dear: freedom, democracy, tolerance,
and openness. It seeks to destroy any and all
who do not share its perverse, medieval view
of the world. And, with alarming clarity, it has
threatened Canadians directly and specifically.

It’s now using that territory to launch and
inspire attacks around the world; its goal is to
replace civilization with savagery, and order
with chaos.

Last year’s terrorist attacks in Canada, by killers
inspired by ISIS’s extremism, are a reminder that
we are not immune to these threats.

That's why the Canadian Armed Forces,
alongside like-minded allies of all faiths and
nationalities, are part of a broad international
coalition confronting and disrupting ISIS in
the Middle East right now. We’re fighting the
jihadists there to protect Canadians here.

Canadians did not invent this evil, nor did we
invite its hatred, but we cannot ignore it in the
hope it goes away. Indeed, it was because ISIS
met with little resistance at first that it was
able to establish its so-called caliphate with
such alarming speed.

81 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

We must not allow ISIS to hold a safe haven
from which it can pursue an agenda of anarchy
and violence.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

We're also a leading contributor of support to
the countless men, women, and children forced
to flee ISIS's advance. We don't have to choose,
as some have suggested, between fighting the
soldiers of ISIS and helping its victims. In fact, it’s
imperative that we do both. And we are.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

not cut and run, as our opponents would do.
We will not abandon our allies in the broad
international coalition against ISIS. We will
not pull our troops from the fight against
jihadi terrorism.

I would like, here,
“notToday
to add on what has been

said about Daesh (ISIS) and its
brutal attacks, I would like to
thank Canada, people in government, for receiving the Iraqi
refugees and for the generosity
that they have offered to them
to give them a new hope for
their life. I would like also to
thank all of the financial aid
that has been given to Iraq
and Syria, unfortunately more
needed to be done, but priorities
should be always given to
defeating Daesh so the people
can return to their homes and
resume their normal lives.

”

Bashar Warda, Archbishop of the Chaldean
Diocese of Erbil in Iraq, (August 10, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 82

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Protecting persecuted minorities
around the world
Our Conservative Government has consistently
stood up for, and supported, persecuted
minorities around the world. We’ve made a real
difference in the lives of religious minorities
and young girls and women. And we’ve shown
leadership in accepting refugees and providing
humanitarian assistance.
This is an important part of our principled foreign
policy. A re-elected Conservative Government will
continue to stand up for those who are targeted
because of their faith or gender.
Freedom of religion and belief, and the ability
to express that freedom without fear of
repercussion or repression, is a basic human
right – not just here in Canada, but everywhere.
Our Government established the Office of
Religious Freedom in 2013 to promote this belief
globally, and to advocate tolerance and pluralism
around the world. These values have made
83 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Canada great, and our Government takes very
seriously the work of advancing them.
However, a world of universal freedom of religion
remains elusive, and there is much work left to
do. Almost 75 percent of the world’s population
lives in countries where religious freedom is
highly restricted.
Currently, ISIS has carved out a so-called
caliphate extending from Aleppo in Syria to near
Baghdad in Iraq – and everywhere they hold
sway, innocent men, women and children suffer
atrocities daily because they don’t share the
terrorists’ perverted version of Islam. Christians,
Yazidis, Druze, Alawites, Sunni Bedouins and
Shia Ismailis all face subjugation, persecution,
and, frequently, grisly execution for their beliefs.
Through the Office of Religious Freedom, in
partnership with civil society groups and non-

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

governmental organizations, we are able to stand
up for these oppressed peoples, and for Canadian
values. Principle demands that we act.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

build on our record of promoting tolerance
and openness, as well as the rights of
women and children worldwide, by funding
a new three-year program within the Office
of Religious Freedom to support persecuted
religious minorities in the Middle East, and to
protect their places of worship and priceless
artifacts at risk of destruction.

The ISIS reign of terror and the horrific civil war
being fought in Syria have taken an immense toll
on innocent civilians, creating a refugee crisis of
historic proportions.
The Canadian Armed Forces are taking an active
and robust role in the fight against ISIS, but
we’re also committed to providing comfort and
aid to suffering people facing displacement and
persecution because of the ongoing violence.
Canada has long been a refuge for people fleeing
violence and oppression, from United Empire
Loyalists and fugitive slaves from the United
States in the 18th and 19th centuries, to Eastern
Europeans and Vietnamese “boat people” fleeing
communism in the 20th. And in the 21st century,
Canada is once again opening its doors to those in
need.
We’ve pledged to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees
by September 2016, and 3,000 Iraqis this year.
They will join the 20,000 Iraqis who have already
arrived on our shores since 2009. Religious
minorities within Iraq are at risk of genocide at the
hands of ISIS, and Canada will provide safe haven.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

accept 10,000 more persecuted Syrian and
Iraqi refugees fleeing the brutality of ISIS.

99
We’ll also provide further humanitarian

assistance through the Syria Emergency
Relief Fund to match individual donations
from Canadians up to $100 million.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 84

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

“

Girls and women continue to
remain seriously disadvantaged
across the Commonwealth.
The Canadian government’s
international advocacy efforts
to prevent child, early and
forced marriage are already
drawing attention to this
major challenge.

”

Dr. Asha S. Kanwar, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Commonwealth of
Learning, (July 8, 2015).

Every year, millions of girls around the world –
some as young as five years old – are forced
into marriage. This is far more than just a moral
outrage; it is often a matter of life and death. In
the developing world, the leading cause of death
among girls between the ages of 15 and 19 is
complications during childbirth.
Forced marriage deprives girls of their right to an
education, and condemns them to a life of poverty
and dependence.
And forced marriage is also a weapon of war.
Canadians are rightly appalled at reports of
ISIS fighters taking young female prisoners as
“brides,” or forcing families to let them marry their
daughters in exchange for protection from further
ISIS depravities.
Canada has been a leader in improving maternal,
newborn and child health, and protecting women
and girls is a key component of our foreign
development goals.
It’s also in keeping with Canadian values, which
we hold to be universal. Forced marriage is
unacceptable in Canada, and we’ve taken action to
prevent it from occurring on our soil. But it’s equally
unacceptable anywhere else in the world, no
matter what the misguided advocates of “cultural
sensitivity” might suggest.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

take further action to support the victims of
child, early, and forced marriage, particularly
in the “rape camps” and slave markets
of Iraq and Syria, by establishing a new
program within the Department of Foreign
Affairs, Trade and Development to fund
efforts to combat these practices.

85 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Improving the health of mothers, newborns,
and children around the world has been Stephen
Harper’s top development priority. The Prime
Minister has been leading the world on this
important initiative. And there’s been progress:
thanks to Canadian leadership and global action,
maternal mortality rates are declining and millions
more children are celebrating their fifth birthday.
Yet there’s more work to be done. That’s why our
Government has pledged significant resources to
maternal, newborn, and child health from 2015
to 2020.

99
We’ll continue to rally world leaders to follow

Canada has been a
“tremendous
partner over

the last several years in
partnering to improve health
equity around the world
through its focus on MNCH,
and our foundation looks
forward to our continued
close partnership with the
Canadian government over
the next 15 years.

”

Melinda Gates, Co-Founder, Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, (January 23, 2015).

Canada’s lead in improving women’s and
children’s health in developing countries.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 86

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Cyber security
Advances in technology have led to vast
improvements in our standard of living, but they
have also led to our greater dependence on a
digital infrastructure that underlies everything
from our communications networks to our
financial systems to our electrical grid. And this
dependence makes us vulnerable to attacks
that could compromise our day-to day living,
our personal safety, our economy, and even our
national security.
The threat of cybercrime is one with serious
consequences for Canadians and our economy.
Our Conservative Government has been focused
on strengthening our cyber security to protect
Canadians.
Since 2010, our national cyber security strategy
has been based on three pillars:

99
Securing government systems.
87 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Partnering to secure vital cyber systems
outside the federal government.

99
And helping individual Canadians and their
families enjoy increased online security.

In Economic Action Plan 2015, we announced
significant funding to protect our vital cyber
systems, including establishing a dedicated
RCMP team to investigate cybercrime.
Still, there’s more to be done. Our cyber
systems can be targets for foreign military and
intelligence services and criminal and terrorist
networks. As more and more Canadians rely on
the internet for business and sales, we must
ensure that we’re protected from cyber-attacks
and cybercrimes.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

We’ve proposed legislation that will require
operators of vital cyber systems to implement
robust cybersecurity plans that meet established
standards, and to report cybersecurity breaches to
the federal government.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

enshrine this in law by passing the Protection
of Canada’s Vital Cyber Systems Act when
Parliament resumes.

Cyber security is a shared
“responsibility,
so I am pleased
about this important step
forward to enhance our
collaboration with the Federal
Government on this important
issue. These advancements to
the Strategy will ensure our
essential systems have the
latest threat information, as well
as help us to continue to build
on each other's strengths.

”

Canadian Council of Chief Executives,
(July 22, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 88

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Supporting Ukraine
Canada stands in solidarity with the people of
Ukraine, and will continue to do so. Our position
has been clear: We will never accept Russian
President Vladimir Putin's unwarranted and
illegal occupation and annexation of the Crimean
Peninsula, nor his continued proxy war in other
parts of eastern Ukraine.
The people of Ukraine have left no room for
doubt: The future they desire lies to the West,
with all the freedoms, opportunities and
prosperity that brings. We, along with our allies
in NATO, support them without reservation, and
we stand together in Central and Eastern Europe
as a bulwark against the instability Vladimir Putin
promotes with his reckless provocations.
With the rest of the Western world, Canadians
celebrated the end of the Cold War and the years
of peace that followed. But Vladimir Putin wants
to turn back the clock; he wants Russia to bask
89 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

in the perceived glories of its past, in order to
disguise his failures of leadership in the present.
We look forward to the day when Russia returns
to the community of nations – but until then,
Vladimir Putin’s belligerence must be met with
resolve and real consequences.
Under our Conservative Government, Canada
has been a leading voice on the world stage
in this regard, both in speaking out against
Vladimir Putin’s unprovoked aggression and in
putting pressure on Russia through tough and
meaningful sanctions.
Such sanctions are a key tool in our Government’s
foreign policy, having proven effective against Iran
and North Korea, as well as Russia.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

A re-elected Conservative Government will toughen
Canada’s sanctions regime by:

99
Adding “gross human rights violations” as a
new ground for sanctions.

99
And closing loopholes that allow sanctioned
individuals to circumvent travel restrictions.

These measures will reinforce our support for the
Ukrainian people in their struggle for freedom,
as well as strengthen our ability to respond to
international crises, and align our sanctions regime
with our broader values. They’ll also reinforce our
commitment to standing up for freedom, democracy,
human rights, and the rule of law abroad.
To make sure our sanctions continue to be properly
targeted, and properly implemented, we need to
better track the flow of Russian capital through
global markets – in particular capital connected to
Russian state-owned enterprises and individuals
already under sanction.

forums
“suchIn international
as the UN, the G7 and

NATO, as well as in bilateral
decisions related to providing
Ukraine with military trainers,
Canada has consistently and
meaningfully demonstrated its
support for Ukraine’s right to
sovereignty, territorial integrity
and to ensure the security of
its citizens….Today, Canada
stands among Ukraine’s
greatest friends, something
deeply cherished by the people
of Ukraine.

”

Paul Grod, President, Ukrainian Canada
Congress, (June 9, 2015).

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a financial task force of foreign
policy experts and financial analysts to
perform this task, ensuring that our sanctions
regime maintains its rigor and limits Russian
influence in the global economy.

But our support for Ukraine extends far beyond
sanctions. Canada has contributed both Canadian
Armed Forces personnel and much-needed
equipment to assist the Ukrainian military in its
fight to maintain Ukraine’s sovereignty. We're:

99
Deploying CAF personnel to western Ukraine
to develop and deliver training programs for
their Ukrainian counterparts.

99
Contributing an array of non-lethal supplies,

including tens of thousands of coats, pants and
boots, helmets, protective vests, high-frequency
radios, night-vision goggles and ballistic
eyewear, medical kits and a mobile field
hospital structure, tents, and sleeping bags.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 90

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

“

Since the very beginning
of the crisis the government
of Canada has adopted the
most principled position
of any G-7 country...it has
been steadfast in providing
increased support to the
Ukraine politically, financially
and now with this so much
needed non-lethal lifesaving
equipment. Thank you for
this support which is needed
so much right now and more
importantly for doing the right
thing.

”

Ihor Kozak, League of Ukrainian
Canadians (August 7, 2014).

99
Providing $1 million to the NATO Trust

Funds for Ukraine, intended to enhance the
country’s command and control capabilities.

99
Deploying military personnel as part of

Operation REASSURANCE, including HMCS
Regina, HMCS Toronto, and HMCS Fredericton,
and participating in military exercises.

Canada continues to stand with Ukraine in the face
of Russian provocation and aggression, and will
never accept the Russian occupation of Ukrainian
soil. The measures we have taken to date are robust
and meaningful, but there is more we can do.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

enter into a defence co-operation agreement
with Ukraine.

99
We’ll also add Ukraine to the list of

eligible countries for Canadian military
and defence exports.

Our Government, as part of our principled foreign
policy, has long been a leader in promoting free
expression and human rights around the world, and
in speaking out against dictatorships for their cruel
and undemocratic actions. The digital world is one
more battlefield in that struggle.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and illegal
occupation of Ukraine has been accompanied
by a remarkable propaganda push by Moscow.
Russia has used the internet and other media
to manipulate public opinion and spread
misinformation and falsehoods.
By spreading half-truths, rumours and outright lies,
the Kremlin not only confuses opponents but also
sows unwitting and uninformed support for its cause.

91 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Canada can do more to help Ukraine push back
against Russian propaganda.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a Digital Freedom Fund to support
international groups and independent media
using digital tools to advance the causes of
freedom and democracy around the world.
In particular, the fund will support efforts to
counter Russian propaganda in Ukraine and
elsewhere in Eastern Europe.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 92

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Supporting Canada’s
military
Canada’s Armed Forces have been central to
the story of our country for more than 200
years – central to our national identity, central
to our success as a country, central at times
to our very survival. And in the ever more
insecure world in which we are now living, that
is as true as it ever was.
We live in an unpredictable world, and the
Canadian Armed Forces must be ready to
respond immediately to events that threaten
the interests of Canada at home and around the
world. Canada’s fighting men and women have
always been, and remain today, the ultimate
guarantors of our values and freedoms.

93 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

To ensure that the CAF can carry out its
missions, we’ve:

99
Re-built the "core military capabilities" of

the CAF following a decade of darkness
under the Liberals. The CAF's air transport,
sovereignty surveillance and army combat
capacities have all been strengthened.

99
Taken the steps needed to rebuild the Royal
Canadian Navy and the Canadian Coast
Guard through the comprehensive National
Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy worth
some $35B. With ships now being built
in both Halifax and Vancouver, the NSPS
engages Canadian industry from coast-tocoast in sustaining RCN and Coast Guard
fleets in the decades to come.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

99
Resolutely defended Canada and our friends

overseas against a growing terrorist threat
by deploying military forces to participate in
the military coalition led by President Obama
against ISIS.

99
Taken a firm stand against Russian

aggression in Ukraine by establishing a
Canadian military training mission there, and
also by supporting deterrence in Europe in
conjunction with our NATO allies.

A re-elected Conservative Government will continue
to support and stand up for Canada’s military
because they’re the ones who stand up for us. This
support includes an $11.8 billion, ten-year increase
to the Department of National Defence’s budget to
ensure that Canada can continue to field a combatready military to serve at home and abroad.
Missions abroad sometimes fall to Canada’s
Special Operations Forces, who have the agility and
adaptability to tackle any challenge, anywhere in
the world. When duty calls, the CAF is always there
for us and our allies, and our Special Operations
Forces are the sharp end of the spear.
Right now, members of the Special Operations
Forces are in Iraq, training and advising Kurdish
Iraqi forces in the fight against the so-called
Islamic State – confronting them there, to protect
Canadians here at home.
But no matter what the task, from training
allies to carrying out hostage negotiations, from
responding to terrorist threats to taking direct
action against Canada’s enemies, grateful
Canadians can count on the men and women
of the Special Operations Forces to stand up for
Canada when the need is greatest.

99
To help the Special Operations Forces

maintain their top operational capacity, a
re-elected Conservative Government will
expand their size, bolstering their ranks by
nearly 35 percent by 2022.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 94

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

The military reserves have a long and proud history
in Canada, dating to before the War of 1812,
serving with distinction in every conflict in which
Canada has been involved. When the Primary
Reserve and the Supplementary Reserve are
combined with the Canadian Rangers and Cadet
organizations across the country, Canada has
24,000 men and women ready, willing and able to
answer their country’s call.
The reserves are a vital part of our military structure,
supplementing the Regular Forces and providing
“surge” capacity when required. Reservists
accounted for one in four of our men and women
who served in Afghanistan, and some have already
served in our mission against ISIS in Iraq.
The reserves are also an important part of our
communities; they're the pride of more than 100
cities, towns and villages from coast to coast to
coast. And they've always been there for Canadians
when duty calls at home, including providing
emergency response to natural disasters like
floods, forest fires, and ice storms.

99
Their service to our country is indispensable,

and to ensure the Reserves have the numbers
necessary to carry out the many duties asked
of them, a re-elected Conservative Government
will increase the number of reservists by 15
percent, bringing the Reserves’ total strength to
30,000 in the next four years.

99
We’ll also streamline and shorten the

current reserve recruiting process,
improve training opportunities for reserve
personnel, and broaden the eligibility
criteria to include permanent residents
in order to tap into this significant pool of
possible recruits and facilitate their path to
full Canadian citizenship.

95 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Strengthening our military
assets and institutions
Supporting Canada’s military means ensuring
that they have the assets, training, and resources
needed to do their jobs safely.

The College began granting university degrees in
1985. But it fell victim to Liberal cuts to defence
spending, and closed ten years later.

Our Conservative Government has made major
investments to upgrade and improve our military’s
readiness after the Liberal Decade of Darkness,
with its budget cuts and neglect that imperiled our
military and left Canadians less safe.

Our Government partially re-opened the College
in 2008 as a CEGEP organized to prepare
Quebec Cadets for post-secondary education –
in particular studies at the Royal Military College
in Kingston, Ontario.

We won’t let that happen again. A re-elected
Conservative Government will continue to invest
in Canada’s military and support the men and
women who put their lives on the line for their
fellow citizens.

But we want to see the College once again achieve
its full potential, and do more to encourage a new
generation of Francophone military officers.

Since its founding in 1952, Royal Military College
Saint-Jean (College Militaire Royal de Saint-Jean)
has been preparing young Canadians for careers
in the Canadian Armed Forces and beyond.

96 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
If re-elected, we’ll honour Quebec’s historic

and present-day contributions to the Canadian
Armed Forces by re-establishing Royal Military
College Saint-Jean as a full, degree-granting
post-secondary institution similar to RMC in
Kingston. We’ll work with the Government of
Quebec to fulfill this promise.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

HMCS Discovery – located adjacent to Stanley
Park – was constructed in World War II from the
Vancouver Half Company of the Royal Canadian
Navy Volunteer Reserve. Its initial purpose was
for the recruitment and training of almost 8,000
personnel during the war.
Discovery continues to serve an important role
in training, and as the headquarters for several
Reserve and Cadet Units.
Our Conservative Government recently announced
enhancements to the facility that will expand
the Navy and Coast Guard’s capacity to conduct
search-and-rescue operations as well as oversee
response to marine pollution incidents in the
Vancouver Harbour area.

99
If re-elected, we’ll build on these efforts by

rebuilding and expanding Royal Canadian
Navy reserve division base HMCS Discovery in
Vancouver, positioning it to become a major
Maritime joint operations centre for the Royal
Canadian Navy and the Canadian Coast Guard.
HMCS Discovery has a proud history with the
RCN, and this construction will respect the
current facility’s historic architecture.

The Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River aren’t
just iconic in terms of geography – they’re defining
elements of our history, and part of the reason for
Canada's growth into a great trading nation. With
the development of the St. Lawrence Seaway, they
became our gateway to the world.
Now, commercial vessels make more than 2,000
trips through the Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence
Seaway system every year. They generate a
staggering $34 billion in economic activity in
Canada and the United States, and support more
than 200,000 good, stable jobs.
Given the vital importance of this system to our
national economy, and the access it provides to
our most populated areas as well as Canada’s
industrial heartland, it's imperative that the Royal
Canadian Navy have a presence on these waters.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 97

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will build
on our commitment to our national security by
commissioning four Royal Canadian Navy patrol
vessels, to be dedicated to the Great Lakes and
the Saint Lawrence Seaway.

This investment will allow for training on the Great
Lakes and help with recruitment and retention in the
Naval Reserve and Sea Cadets. Presently about half
their membership is based in the Saint LawrenceGreat Lakes region, in Ontario and Quebec.

98 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

Northern sovereignty
The North has achieved immense geopolitical
significance, and corresponding increased
interest from foreign powers, demanding a
Canadian presence to back up our legal and
historic claims to its lands and waters.
We have taken important steps to date, including
expanding the Canadian Rangers, establishing
an Arctic Training Centre in Resolute, modernizing
patrol aircraft and expanding our air transport
fleet, procuring Arctic Offshore Patrol Ships,
and launching the contruction of the John G.
Diefenbaker polar icebreaker.
Still, there is more to be done. Our Conservative
Government will continue to make protecting
our Northern sovereignty a major priority. The
choice is to "use it or lose it," and that lies at
the heart of our Arctic foreign policy: In the

99 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

North, exercising our sovereignty through
effective military capability, active diplomacy,
and sustainable economic development is our
number-one goal.
Since the end of the Second World War, the
Canadian Rangers, as part of the Canadian
Armed Forces reserve, have been our eyes and
ears in the North, serving in national security
and public safety capacities. (Their apt motto is
Vigilans, which means “The Watchers.”)
For all those years, the Rangers have been issued
No. 4 Lee-Enfield rifles. The Lee-Enfield’s history of
service to the Canadian military is matched only by
its sturdy reliability under Arctic conditions, but the
time has come for its replacement. That’s why our
Government is replacing the Rangers’ Lee-Enfields
with new rifles over the next four years.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

The Lee Enfield has taken on iconic status, a
proud symbol of both Canada’s distinguished
military history and our sovereignty over the Arctic
– much like the Rangers themselves.

99
When the new, modern firearms are issued,

a re-elected Conservative Government will
honour the Canadian Rangers and their long
service by transferring ownership of the LeeEnfields to the Rangers they have served for
so many years.

The Junior Canadian Rangers program, in which
Canadian youths aged 12-18 learn camping,
navigation and firearms training as well as a
greater appreciation of traditional Northern culture
and lifestyles, is approaching its 20th anniversary.
Permanently established in 1998, there are now
more than 135 Junior Canadian Ranger patrols in
remote and isolated communities across the North.

99
Our Government increased the number of

Junior Rangers participating in this popular
and worthy program from 3,400 to more than
4,200 in 2008. If re-elected, we’ll increase
their number yet again, to 5,000, in time for
the organization’s 20th anniversary.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 100

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA

AT RISK
Our Conservative Government has made Canada safer
and more secure in a troubled and dangerous world.
We recognize the threat posed by jihadi terrorism and
have made the choices and investments – including
supporting the men and women of the Canadian
Armed Forces – to protect the country. Prime Minister
Harper’s principled foreign policy also means that
Canada walks tall in the world and stands up for what’s
right and just. The Liberals and NDP would take the
country down a much different and more dangerous
path. They would undermine Canada’s security by:
Taking away the tools that we have granted
our law enforcement agencies to protect
Canadians from terrorist threats.
Pulling out of the broad international coalition
against ISIS that’s keeping the fight against
this deadly group outside of our borders.
Returning to a “Decade of Darkness” of
defence spending cuts that would hurt the
Canadian Armed Forces and weaken our
national defence.
Abandoning our principled foreign policy that
stands up for Israel and other allies such as
Ukraine in exchange for a “go-along-to-getalong” approach that weakens our country
and diminishes our moral standing.

101 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

  

 

 

 

 

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN
FOR SAFE STREETS

 

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

To keep Canadian streets safe,
a re-elected Conservative
Government will:
Enact “Life Means Life” legislation to
ensure the worst criminals never get a
chance at parole
Expand our National Anti-Drug Strategy
Crack down on criminal gangs
Protect seniors from financial fraud

For too long, Canada's system of justice had its
priorities backwards: it focused on the so-called
“rights” and concerns of criminals, while victims
and their families were left on the outside looking
in. We've worked hard to reverse that, in particular
by bringing into force our ground-breaking Victims
Bill of Rights. Now victims and their families are
back where they belong – at the heart of our justice
system. Never before has a government made
victims' concerns such a priority.
Add to that a substantial list of other measures
from our ambitious law-and-order agenda – to
protect our children from predators and drug
dealers, to keep dangerous criminals behind
bars and off our streets, and to keep illegal guns,
gangs, and drugs out of our communities – and
it's no wonder that the crime rate is going down.
Justice is a fundamental Canadian value, and
Canadians expect it to be administered fully, fairly,
honestly and transparently. So do we.
But the Liberals and NDP don’t. Justin Trudeau’s
only criminal justice priority is to change the law to
allow the sale of marijuana in corner stores, making
it more accessible to our children. And the NDP has
a dangerous, ideology-driven criminal justice policy
that puts the so-called “rights” of criminals ahead
of the rights of victims. The soft-on-crime NDP
have consistently opposed serious penalties for
dangerous offenders.

103 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Canadians can count on our Conservative
Government to put their security first. We share the
common-sense beliefs of law-abiding Canadians,
and we will continue pursuing new measures to
crack down on criminals and support victims.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to make safe streets and
communities a top priority.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 104

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

National Anti-Drug
Strategy
One vitally important part of keeping our streets
and communities safe is keeping them free from
drugs, and from the organized gangs that prey on
addicts and profit from drug abuse.

99
Increased the resources for law-enforcement

Our Conservative Government’s National AntiDrug Strategy set out to reverse years of inaction
by previous governments – indeed, in some
cases, years of making the problem worse. We've
taken a three-pronged approach, focusing on
prevention, treatment, and enforcement.

among young Canadians, of the dangers of
drug use.

To this effect we've:

99
Toughened penalties for serious drug

producers and dealers, including
mandatory minimum prison sentences
for some offences.

99
Introduced legislation to reduce drug
trafficking and abuse in our prisons.

105 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

and justice officials to investigate drug
crimes and prosecute offenders.

99
Worked hard to raise awareness, especially
99
And provided significant support for

treatment, to help people who’ve fallen
prey to addiction.

We renewed funding for the National AntiDrug Strategy in 2012, and in 2014 expanded
the Strategy’s focus to include the abuse of
prescription drugs.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

A re-elected Conservative Government will build
on this record by expanding the National Anti-Drug
Strategy to:

99
Create a national toll-free help line to provide
parents with advice and guidance, including
how to recognize the signs of drug use and
how to prevent their children from using
drugs in the first place.

99
And increase funding to the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police Clandestine Laboratory
Teams, which investigate drug labs and
target organized crime.

There is evidence of a strong link between mental
illness and drug use: 30 percent of people
diagnosed with a mental disorder also have a history
of substance abuse at some point in their lives.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will ask
the Mental Health Commission of Canada, as
part of its new, 10-year mandate announced
in Economic Action Plan 2015, to work with
the Canadian Centre for Substance Abuse to
further integrate initiatives involving mental
health and substance abuse.

Mental illness is a challenge that touches the
lives of millions of Canadians. One in five will
feel its effects in any given year; one in three
will experience it at some point in their lifetime.
The effect on Canada’s economy has been
estimated at close to $50 billion a year. The cost to
individuals and families can only be measured in
heartache and despair.
That's why, in 2007, our Government established
the Mental Health Commission, with a broad 10year mandate to improve Canada’s mental health
system, and to increase awareness of mental
health issues, and it’s why we are committed to
renewing that mandate in 2017.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 106

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Along with a new focus on the intersection of
drug abuse and mental health, a re-elected
Conservative Government will set out other
priorities for the Commission.

99
Nearly 4,000 Canadians take their own

lives every year. Suicide is the second-most
common cause of death among teens, and
the leading cause of death among Aboriginal
Canadians under the age of 44. More than
90 percent of people who commit or attempt
suicide are struggling with mental health
issues, substance abuse, or both. The Mental
Health Commission of Canada will study
community suicide-prevention programs,
including in First Nations communities, to
test their effectiveness.

99
The Commission will also prioritize working

with groups who, for a number of reasons,
experience mental illness at a higher level than
the rest of the country, including veterans and
members of Canada’s First Nations.

107 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Targeting criminal
gangs
Youth gang crime is a serious concern across the
country. It poses an obvious danger to law-abiding
Canadians, but the damage is even furtherreaching. Young Canadians who get involved in
criminal gangs risk seeing the recklessness of
youth become a wasted adulthood in our prison
system, if they survive at all.

99
We’ve amended the Criminal Code so that

Our Conservative Government has been clear: Our
first priority is the safety and security of our streets
and communities, and anyone who puts that in
jeopardy must face the full force of the law.

penalties for criminal gang recruitment.

To this effect, we’ve established an extensive
legislative record targeting youth gangs, and
organized crime more generally.

99
We’ve legislated mandatory minimum

penalties for gang-related drug crimes and
offences involving firearms.

108 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

all murders connected to organized crime
are automatically first-degree murders,
and we’ve created a new offence targeting
the reckless criminal use of firearms, in
particular drive-by shootings.

99
And we’ve passed a law establishing tougher
It’s a criminal offence to belong to a gang and
to participate in gang activities. But there’s no
established list of gangs in Canada, meaning
the existence of particular gang as a criminal
organization must be proven anew in every case.
Parliamentary committees have recommended
that we establish a gang listing system – similar
to the way we deal with terrorist groups – and the
Government of Manitoba has recently listed the

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Hells Angels as a criminal organization. We think
this idea has merit.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a criminal gang listing process to
help crack down on gangs and speed up the
justice system.

We are also working hard to prevent young people
from joining gangs in the first place. In 2006 we
launched the Youth Gang Prevention Fund, to
support organizations that intervene directly with
at-risk youth. These organizations steer youth away
from joining gangs or, in some cases, support them
as they get out.
The funds from this program, which we made
permanent in 2011, are put to a wide range of
uses, from renting space and training staff to
mentoring, counselling and skills development,
and more.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will increase resources to the Youth Gang
Prevention Fund by 25 percent, to allow
it to help even more young people avoid a
life of crime.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 109

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Protecting seniors
from fraud
The email says they’ve won the lottery – but
they need to pay a processing fee up front
to collect their winnings. That new friend
they met over social media, who eases their
loneliness, would love to visit in person – but
needs money to buy a plane ticket. The voice
on the phone claims to be a grandchild who’s
hit a rough spot while backpacking in Europe
and needs cash in a hurry.
The number of tricks con artists have used to
separate seniors from their hard-earned savings
is bewildering and distressing. And when you
combine scams like these with other types of
fraud – from business swindles to identity theft –
Canadians lose an astonishing $10 billion to $30
billion to fraudsters every year.
The RCMP, in co-operation with the Competition
Bureau and the Ontario Provincial Police, funds
the Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre to combat these
110 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

types of crime. But as technology becomes more
sophisticated, it also becomes more and more
challenging to keep on top of the problem.

99
To combat fraudsters who target Canadians,

a re-elected Conservative Government will
provide more resources to the Canadian AntiFraud Centre to bolster its intelligence and
disruption activities, in particular online fraud
targeting Canadian seniors.

We’ll also toughen the punishment for con
artists who steal money from Canadians. In
2011, our Government passed the Standing
Up for Victims of White Collar Crime Act,
which imposes a mandatory minimum prison
sentence of two years for criminals who commit
fraud involving more than $1 million. It also
instructs judges to consider restitution when
handing down a sentence.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

In 2013, we passed the Protecting Canada’s
Seniors Act, which makes the age of the victim or
victims an aggravating factor at sentencing time.
But jail time for the perpetrator doesn’t make the
victims financially whole again. The most important
thing to them is that they get their money back.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

members most want
“their[CARP]
funds returned, followed

by seeing the perpetrator in jail
or having the perpetrator
personally repay the funds when
asked for the ideal outcome.
CARP (March 24, 2015).

”

will amend the Criminal Code to make any
financial fraud over $5,000, with multiple
victims, carry a mandatory minimum
sentence of two years in prison, unless the
offender makes full and complete restitution
to his or her victims.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 111

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Life Means Life and other
justice priorities
Like most Canadians, we hope for the successful
rehabilitation of people who have fallen into a
life of crime. But our first priority is the safety
and security of Canadians and the communities
where we live, work, and raise our children.
There are some criminals so dangerous that,
once imprisoned, they must never again walk the
streets among us.
Currently, a life sentence – even for the most
violent killers – comes with the chance of parole
after 25 years. When these criminals are given
the opportunity for parole, Canadians’ faith in
our justice system is shaken, and the families of
victims are forced to relive the horror of their loss
all over again.
Our proposed Bill C-53, the Life Means Life Act,
will ensure that offenders who are convicted
of the most heinous murders or those who are
convicted of high treason will be imprisoned for
112 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

the rest of their natural lives with no access to
parole. This includes murders involving sexual
assault, kidnapping, terrorism, the killing of
police officers or corrections officers, or any first
degree murder of a particularly brutal nature.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will make passing the Life Means Life
Act its top criminal justice priority when
Parliament resumes this fall.

And while reintroducing and passing the Life
Means Life Act is our top justice priority, it is
just one of several measures our Government
is proposing to further protect the safety of
Canadians and the security of our communities:

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

99
The Dangerous and Impaired Driving Act

will reflect the gravity of this offence in the
minds of most Canadians, and make the
letter of the law match its spirit by limiting
the use of technical defences in impaired
driving cases and simplifying proof of blood
alcohol concentration. It will also make the
punishment match the severity of the crime
for a wide range of transportation-related
offences, including increased penalties for
drunk drivers.

99
The Removal of Serious Foreign Criminals

Act will make it easier and faster to deport
dangerous foreign nationals who commit
serious crimes in Canada; to transfer
these foreign criminals back to their home
countries; and will make foreign criminals
ineligible for a pardon.

99
The Penalties for the Criminal Possession of

Firearms Act will restore mandatory minimum
penalties for the illegal possession of a
loaded prohibited or restricted firearm, such
as fully automatic weapons, sawed-off rifles,
or handguns, for the purpose of committing a
serious offence or in a place where there is a
real risk of harm to innocent bystanders. This
will apply the full force of the law to offenders
who engage in serious criminal behavior while
exempting law-abiding gun owners who store
their weapons legally.

99
The Protection of Communities from the

Evolving Dangerous Drug Trade Act will allow
the Government to respond quickly and
effectively to the emergence of new illicit
substances appearing on Canadian streets;
broaden existing criminal laws related to the
possession, production, or sale of substances
or equipment intended to produce illegal
controlled substances; and enhance the
inspection, monitoring, and regulation of
legal controlled substances to prevent their
diversion for illegal ends.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 113

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

99
The Victims Rights in the Military Justice

System Act builds on our historic Victims Bill
of Rights by ensuring that victims of service
offences within the military justice system
have the same rights as are contained in the
civilian Victims Bill of Rights.

A re-elected Conservative Government will
reintroduce these measures in Parliament and
make sure they become the law of the land. And
we’ll continue to do more to protect Canadians,
including taking new action to address the problem
of habitual, chronic offenders.
In addition, we'll build on our record of ensuring
offender accountability and the principle of
earned parole.
We're committed to helping most inmates
in Canadian prisons prepare for successful
reintegration into society after their release by
offering opportunities for vocational training.

“

Habitat for Humanity Canada
is proud to be partners with a
Government that is creating
positive change for low-income
families who buy Habitat’s
affordable homes and for
CSC offenders who want to
give back to society. This
partnership truly reflects
Habitat’s core belief that
a ‘hand up, not a hand out’
gives people self-worth and
an opportunity to improve
their lives and the lives of
their families.

For those offenders who show that they're ready for
reintegration we'll help provide marketable skills
prior to release that encourage rehabilitation and
lessen the chance that they'll re-offend.
Since 2012, a partnership between Correctional
Services Canada and Habitat for Humanity has
been a success on both fronts. More than 350
inmates have volunteered to work on more than
20 housing projects, ranging from work on kitchen
cabinets and bathroom vanities to full construction
of pre-fabricated homes.

99
Encouraged by these results, a re-elected

”

Habitat for Humanity (November 14,
2012).

114 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Conservative Government will expand the
partnership between Correctional Services
Canada and Habitat for Humanity, doubling the
number of projects over the next four years.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

Protecting Canadians and
supporting victims
Our Conservative government has done more
than any previous government in Canadian
history to protect children and support victims
of crime. Upon taking office in 2006, we
inherited a system that was concerned more
with criminals than with victims. It had to
change. And that’s what we’ve been doing.
Some of our concrete steps to protect
children include:

99
Supporting Child Advocacy Centres and Child
and Youth Advocacy Centres to coordinate
the investigation, prosecution and treatment
of child abuse and to help child victims with
counselling and other services.

99
Passing the Tougher Penalties for

Child Predators Act to combat child
sexual exploitation.

115 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Bringing in the Protecting Canadians from

Online Crime Act to protect Canadians, and
in particular youth, from online exploitation
and cyberbullying.

99
Increasing penalties for sexual offences
against children and creating two new
offences aimed at conduct that could
facilitate or enable a sexual offence
against a child.

99
Strengthening the sex offender registry.
99
And investing $14.2 million a year to protect

children from predators through the National
Strategy for the Protection of Children from
Sexual Exploitation on the Internet.

But we can do more by working with victims’
advocates such as Sheldon Kennedy to protect
children and help those who have been
victimized by crime.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

double funding for Child Advocacy Centres
and Child and Youth Advocacy Centres,
and will dedicate resources to help existing
Centres provide satellite services to
communities outside of urban centres
and those without a Centre.

99
We’ll also set aside funding for research into
the “invisible” economic and social damage
inflicted upon victims of crime.

These investments in front-line support for
victims and children will help those who have
been impacted by crime and ensure that they
have the support and assistance they need.

just want to say thank you
“forIthat
announcement and

thank you for the focus on
victims. I think for a long time
people have never understood
the impact of the invisible
damage….I think that what
you’ve done and what’s been
done over the years has taken
it [supporting victims] out of a
box-check and been put into
a priority and that’s where we
need to be – so thank you.

”

Sheldon Kennedy (September 18, 2015).

High-profile cases of human trafficking and cyber
and sexual violence against women and girls are
reminders that we must ensure that Canada is
safe for all Canadians.
Our Conservative Government has a strong
record of protecting Canada’s women and girls
from violence and providing support for those
affected by it. This includes:

99
Making a $100 million, 10-year investment to
prevent, detect, and combat family violence
and child abuse.

99
Launching the Action Plan to Address

Family Violence and Violent Crimes Against
Aboriginal Women and Girls.

99
 Strengthening our justice system by

passing the Protecting Victims from Sex
Offenders Act, to protect all Canadians,
including women, from repeat, violent or
sexual offenders, and the Zero Tolerance for
Barbaric Cultural Practices Act, which aims
to protect girls and young women from early
and forced marriage.

99
Nearly doubling support to end violence against
women and girls, through community-based
projects as part of the Women’s Program under
Status of Women Canada.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 116

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

These concrete, practical steps are helping to
protect women and girls so that they can pursue
their dreams and opportunities.
But unfortunately there’s more work to be done.
Human trafficking is a global blight that ensnares
an estimated two million people every year – with
some estimates putting the number of victims,
mostly women and children, at as many as
15,000. Frequently, victims are drawn into forced
labour or prostitution.
This terrible crime is an affront to Canadian
values, stripping from its victims their freedom,
their basic rights, and their human dignity, most
often under threat of violence or death.
Salvation Army applauds
“theThegovernment
of Canada's

announcement and the
commencement of a National
Action Plan to combat Human
Trafficking in Canada. We
anticipate greater cooperation
among the judiciary and the
police, opportunities to build
awareness of the cause and
develop opportunities to
educate all Canadians to
the entrapment and enslavement of it's victims. Most
importantly we welcome a plan
that enhances the support for
the victims of these horrible
crimes, their fight to escape
and the struggle to, rebuild
their lives, regain the liberties
that have been taken from them
and the opportunity to grow
into survivors.

”

Major Brian Venables, Salvation Army of
Canada, (June 6, 2012).

Our Conservative Government has worked closely
with law enforcement officials, civil society
organizations, and community and religious
groups to combat human trafficking. We’ve
passed legislation to restrict significantly the
sex trade in Canada, including the scourge of
child prostitution. We’ve established mandatory
minimum prison sentences for child trafficking.
We’ve raised the age of consent from 14 to 16.
And we’ve provided substantial funding for
the National Action Plan to Combat Human
Trafficking, which co-ordinates and supports
efforts to bring traffickers to justice and to
provide comfort and assistance to their victims.
But we can – and we will – do more.
A re-elected Conservative Government will:

99
Renew the National Action Plan to Combat

Human Trafficking when it reaches the end of
its current mandate in 2016.

99
Increase funding to efforts to help women
escape the sex trade.

99
 Establish February 22 as Canada’s “Anti-

117 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

Human Trafficking Day” – the anniversary
of the unanimous decision by Parliament
in 2007 to condemn all forms of human
trafficking and slavery.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

99
And, using the team of human trafficking

investigators led by the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police in Montreal as an example,
establish similar police teams in Toronto,
Winnipeg, Calgary, and Vancouver.

In Canada, men and women are equal under the
law. It's one of the values that makes Canada a
land of opportunity and prosperity, a country that
attracts countless immigrants from all around
the world.
Sadly, there are some newcomers who embrace
the promise of Canada, but not those values that
make this country great, and who import certain
brutal practices – most often affecting women
and girls – that have no place here, or anywhere.
The tragic truth is that certain practices,
such as female genital mutilation, so-called
honour killings, polygamy, and early and forced
marriages, are taking place within some cultural
communities in Canada.
That’s why our Government was proud to pass
legislation that enshrines our aversion to these
practices, and gives law-enforcement officials
the power to prevent many of them from
occurring on Canadian soil.
But these cruelties too often are carried out in
the shadows, out of sight of the authorities. And
members of Canada’s cultural communities who
expose these practices risk ostracism, or worse,
as a result of coming forward.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a tip line allowing Canadians to
alert the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to
suspected cases of female genital mutilation,
so-called honour killings, polygamy, and early
and forced marriages.

99
And we’ll mandate the integrated teams of
Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers in
Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg, Calgary, and
Vancouver to investigate these cases.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 118

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

AT RISK
Our Conservative Government is committed to keeping
Canada’s streets and communities safe for Canadians
and their families. Since 2006, we’ve introduced and
passed over 60 substantive pieces of legislation to
help keep criminals behind bars, protect children, put
the rights of victims ahead of criminals, and crack
down on drugs, guns, and gangs. The result is that our
streets are safer, our children are better protected, and
victims are where they belong – at the center of our
criminal justice system.
The Liberals and NDP don’t share our vision.
They make excuses for criminals and think
incarceration – for public safety reasons, or even
as punishment – is rarely warranted. The Liberals'
top justice priority is to change the law to allow
the sale of marijuana in our corner stores, making
it more accessible to our children. Given the
chance, the Liberals and NDP would:
Get rid of mandatory minimum penalties for
violent repeat offenders.
Stop our Life Means Life Act to remove the
possibility of parole for the most brutal and
violent criminals.
Establish so-called “safe” injection sites in our
communities, bringing serious drugs into our
neighbourhoods and closer to our children.
Legalize marijuana and prostitution and the
criminal underground that they fuel.

119 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

  

 

 

CANADA 150

 

 



   
 
  
 
 

 

1867-2017
g?g I

1867-201 

   

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN
FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

To strengthen Canada’s
communities, a re-elected
Conservative Government will:
Implement our historic investment in
public infrastructure
Provide tax relief for those who belong to
service clubs
Continue to support Canada’s universal,
publicly-funded health care system
Fund cutting-edge health research
Support conservation and economic
development in rural Canada
Continue to strengthen Canadian citizenship
Impose a moratorium on Senate
appointments

Our Conservative Government shares the pride
all Canadians feel in living in the greatest country
in the world. We're committed to building a future
of hope and opportunity for our children and
grandchildren.
We know that a strong economy is the
foundation for strong communities and a strong
and prosperous country. As a government we
have taken real action to protect our economy
and promote an enviable quality of life in all
communities – cities, towns, and rural areas. We're:

99
Making historic investments in

community infrastructure, to support
economic development and local
recreation and activities.

99
Providing significant new resources to

support Canadian veterans who are affected
by disability or injury, and those who wish to
transition back into civilian life.

121 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

99
Promoting charitable giving, community

partnerships, and voluntarism because we
know Canadians are generous people and
that local challenges are often best solved by
community action.

99
Celebrating Canada’s rich history and culture
to give us a powerful sense of national
accomplishment, shared sacrifice, and
collective aspirations.

99
Promoting arts, culture, and sport to bring
vitality and economic development to our
communities.

99
Providing unprecedented financial support

for Canada’s universal, publicly-funded health
care system.

99
Supporting critical research on health issues
that touch all Canadians such as cancer and
diseases that affect the brain.

99
Partnering with Canada’s outdoors

community to conserve our country’s unique
natural environment.

99
Taking practical, effective common-sense

steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

99
Undertaking important reforms to help

Canada’s First Nations participate more fully
in Canada’s economy.

99
Strengthening Canadian citizenship to protect
and reaffirm its value.

99
And protecting our democracy and improving
our public institutions.

These important steps have protected our economy
and contributed to a more prosperous, more
dynamic, and more united Canada. We’re proud
of what we’ve accomplished together. But there’s
much more to be done.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to support Canadian communities
according to their unique needs and priorities.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 122

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

New Building
Canada Plan
You’ve been hearing a lot of talk about
infrastructure spending lately – but it’s a
conversation our Conservative Government
has been leading for years. Everybody else is
finally catching up, in recognition of the fact that
good infrastructure is vital to our country, our
communities, and our day-to-day quality of life.
What was true at the time of Confederation
remains true today: ambitious investment in
infrastructure is key to protecting our economy
and moving it forward.
Investing in infrastructure is about more than
roads and bridges, ports and public transit,
or water treatment facilities and community
recreation centres. It’s about building healthy and
prosperous communities. It’s about making it
easier for hardworking Canadians to get to work, to
do business, and then to get home to their families
again. And it’s about creating countless good jobs.
123 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

But while the other parties are talking, our
Government has been acting. We took the
federal Gas Tax Fund, doubled it, indexed it, and
made it permanent. We established the Building
Canada Plan, and expanded and extended it into
the New Building Canada Plan.
Combine all this with spending on federal
infrastructure and the Public Transit Fund
announced in Economic Action Plan 2015, and
our investments in public infrastructure are
unprecedented in Canadian history and are
three times higher than under any previous
federal government. In fact, Canada has led
the G-7 in infrastructure investments since our
Conservative Government took office. And we're
positioned to invest more than $80 billion in
federal, provincial and municipal infrastructure
over the next 10 years.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

As a result of our investments in infrastructure,
we have brought the average age of Canada's
core public infrastructure down from a peak of
17 years in 2001 to an estimated 14.7 years in
2013. It’s now lower than the historical average
over the last 50 years.
That doesn’t matter to our opponents. They’re
telling you they’ll spend even more. But what they
won’t tell you is how they’ll pay for it. The real
answer is that they don’t know, and don’t care.
They’ll raise your taxes. Or run up debt. Or both.
We have made historic investments in
infrastructure, but we have done it without
crippling our economy and hurting Canadian
families. In fact, we’ve done it while lowering taxes
and balancing the books.

Sustained investment in
“infrastructure
is critical to

Canada’s long-term economic
growth. The investments
announced today will help
governments across Canada
continue the process of
infrastructure renewal and
set Canada on the path to
a more globally competitive
economy.

”

Michael Atkinson, Canadian Construction
Association, (March 21, 2013).

99
And we’ll continue to make these crucial,

historic investments, through our ten-year,
$84 billion New Building Canada Plan and
federal infrastructure investments to support
community infrastructure – without saddling
our grandchildren with the bills.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 124

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Standing up for Canada’s
veterans
The men and women of the Canadian Armed
Forces do us proud, day in and day out, and they
deserve all the gratitude and support we can
give them. But that doesn't end when they leave
military service. Every Canadian veteran deserves
to be treated with respect and dignity. As the needs
of our veterans evolve, so must our response to
those needs – whether it's helping them transition
back to civilian life and work, or navigate the health
care system. Veterans risked all to give us the
peaceful, prosperous country we enjoy today, and
that's a debt we can never begin to repay.

99
A new Retirement Income Security Benefit

That’s why our Conservative Government has
made significant improvements to the New
Veterans Charter to improve programs, benefits
and services for the men and women who have
worn our military’s uniform so proudly. These
improvements include:

employees to improve processing times.

99
Opening new, frontline mental health
clinics across the country.

125 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

for veterans over the age of 65.

99
A new Family Caregiver Relief Benefit.
99
A new Critical Injury Benefit.
99
A new and better Permanent Impairment
Allowance.

99
Enhancing the Earnings Loss Benefit.
99
Hiring new case managers and new

In fact, we’ve increased the amount spent per
veteran by 35 percent – and we’ll continue to
make investments to improve frontline service
for Canadian veterans.
We’ve also provided more assistance to veterans
making the transition to civilian employment,

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

and more support for those who have suffered
disabilities in the course of their service to Canada.
But we can do more.
The Earnings Loss Benefit is a taxable monthly
entitlement paid out to injured veterans who are
either participating in a rehabilitation program or
are unable to find suitable employment due to the
nature of their injuries, to ensure that their income
remains at least 75 percent of their gross prerelease military salary. There are currently 1,860
veterans receiving this benefit.
Any outside income earned by a veteran who
cannot be suitably employed once he or she
finishes a rehab program is currently clawed
back dollar-for-dollar – a real disincentive for
veterans who would otherwise want to take on
a different kind of work. This limitation deprives
them of the challenge and dignity of a job and
their communities of the benefit of their skills and
talents.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will allow veterans receiving the extended
Earnings Loss Benefit to earn up to $10,000
in employment income annually without
affecting their benefit.

The record-of-service card – the NDI 75 – is issued
to members leaving or who have left the Canadian
Forces with 10 or more years of service. The card
is proof of previous military employment and can
be used as proof of service with the Department
of Veterans Affairs and for companies and service
providers that offer special benefits for former
service members.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

issue a new Canadian Veteran Card to all
Canadian Armed Forces members who
complete basic training. This will reduce red
tape for those seeking veterans services and
make it easier to receive veteran benefits.
The Canadian Veteran Card will also serve as
official government identification.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 126

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Voluntarism and
civil society
Our Conservative Government has a strong
record of supporting charitable giving and civic
engagement. We know that there’s more to our
communities and our country than government
and so we’re helping Canadians give back to
their communities and support one another.
We’ve introduced the First-Time Donor’s Super
Credit, made it easier to donate stocks and
real estate, provided tax relief for volunteer
firefighters and search and rescue volunteers,
and established the Prime Minister’s Volunteer
Awards to recognize Canadians who have made
invaluable contributions to their communities.
We will continue to support voluntarism, because
we know it’s such a source of strength for
Canada and our communities.
Hundreds of thousands of Canadians devote
countless hours to their communities through
127 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

membership in various service clubs active in
Canada. From the Lions to the Elks, from the
Knights of Columbus to the Royal Canadian
Legion, over the years these public-spirited
organizations have been the backbone of big
cities and small towns across the country, raising
millions of dollars for worthy causes and providing
services for the less fortunate here and abroad.
We admire their tradition of commitment to their
communities, and want to encourage a new
generation of Canadians to take up their banners.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will allow service club members to
claim their membership fees under the
Charitable Donations Tax Credit to help
sustain their public spiritedness from
coast to coast to coast.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Canadians take immense pride in the fact we are
a nation of immigrants, and rightly so. That so
many people around the world want to live here
– that so many aspire to Canadian citizenship
– is testament to the hard work generations of
Canadians have put into building the greatest
country in the world on a foundation of values
that resonate all around the globe.

it’s helpful, and I
“thinkI doit’sthinkprobably
recognizing
the benefit (of service clubs)
to society overall by giving
volunteers a break.

”

David Hetherington, President, Rotary
Club of Toronto, (August 23, 2015).

It’s no surprise that one reputable study just this
year declared Canada the most admired country
in the world.
The remarkable truth of it is that one out of
every five Canadians was born elsewhere. Not
many countries in the world can say that. None
of our friends and allies in the G-7 group of
major industrialized nations can.
Many of these new Canadians maintain close
ties with the lands of their birth, socially,
culturally, and economically. These Canadians
are our greatest ambassadors in a globalized
world, and Canada and their home countries are
stronger and better for their efforts.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will recognize these bridge-builders by
establishing a new “Maple Leaf” designation
to honour extraordinary Canadians who
cultivate these links.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 128

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Commemorating Canadian
heritage and culture
In times of great change, the lessons of the past
often light our path into the future.
Our Government considers celebrating Canada's
history and keeping alive the memory of the
people and events that have made this country
what it is today, an important way of restating
and recommitting to the principles that animate
us as Canadians.
From our large national institutions to the
smallest community historical societies,
Canada's museums carry out the noble and vital
task of preserving our collective past. They're
the guardians of our national memory, the vaults
where our national stories are kept safe.
Meanwhile, Canadians are still making new
discoveries about our history, like last year's
discovery of HMS Erebus. Our museums great
and small, and the modern-day explorers still
129 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

uncovering the secrets of our past, must have
our continued support – as must the Canadian
communities from coast to coast to coast
planning to celebrate our history as we approach
the 150th anniversary of Confederation.
Our Conservative Government has an ambitious
plan to celebrate Canada 150.

99
We’ll invest $150 million through the

Canada 150 Community Infrastructure
Program to support up to 1,800 projects
across the country that provide community
and cultural benefits to Canadians.

99
And we’ll provide $210 million through the

Canada 150 Fund to support community
initiatives that leave a legacy for the future.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

John G. Diefenbaker was a tireless advocate for
freedom and human rights, and an early and
powerful champion for Canada’s North and
Northern peoples. First elected to the House of
Commons in 1940, in 1957 he became Canada’s
13th Prime Minister.
As Prime Minister, John Diefenbaker introduced
the landmark Canadian Bill of Rights, which
enshrines in law fundamental rights such as
freedom of speech and religion; freedom of
assembly and association; the equality of all
people; the right to life, liberty, security of the
person, and the enjoyment of property; and the
guarantee of fair and just treatment in our legal
system – values that continue to define Canada
and Canadians to this day.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will honour this important figure in our
history, and ensure his contributions to our
national life and identity are remembered
and understood by future generations, by
purchasing John G. Diefenbaker’s childhood
home and establishing it as a historic site to
be operated by Parks Canada.

The Canada Cultural Investment Fund, operated
by the Department of Canadian Heritage, helps
not-for-profit, professional arts organizations raise
money to create or expand endowment funds by
matching, up to a dollar for every dollar, amounts
raised by private donors. By giving arts groups the
help they need to diversify their revenue streams
and the stability to plan for the future, this program
supports the long-term sustainability of the arts in
our communities.
Our local museums play an equally important role
in our communities, especially with the Canada
150 celebrations fast approaching.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

establish a similar endowment incentive
program to benefit local museums, to ensure
that these vital institutions are supported
now and into the future.

The beauty of what this
“incentive
is [that it] helps

museums become more engaged with their community
to build longstanding bonds,
to encourage philanthropy.
And I welcome that. In order
to get the $15 million, the
museums are going to have
to raise $15 million.

”

Canadian Museums Association,
(September 6, 2015).

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 130

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Promoting arts and
culture and sport
Arts and culture help define who we are as
Canadians. They express Canada’s diversity and
strengthen our national identity.
They’re also important economic drivers in
communities across the country. The arts
and culture sector employs over 640,000
Canadians and is worth almost $450 billion
yearly to our economy.
Our Conservative Government has been proud to
support the creation, presentation, publishing,
and marketing of arts and culture. In fact, we
were the only G-7 country that didn’t cut direct
funding to artists during the recovery from the
global economic recession.
Instead we established permanent funding
for several key arts and culture programs and
organizations. This includes:

131 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
Making permanent federal funding for the
Canada Council for the Arts.

99
Establishing ongoing funding for the

Canada Cultural Investment Fund and the
Canada Cultural Spaces Fund.

99
And providing permanent, ongoing support
for the Canada Book Fund and the Canada
Music Fund.

These investments are promoting Canadian
art and culture and contributing greatly to the
Canadian economy.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to support Canada’s arts
and cultural communities and their
immeasurable contributions to our country.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Our national languages are a part of Canada’s
past, present, and future. Our linguistic duality is
one of the things that makes Canada special.
Our Conservative Government recognizes that
French- and English-speaking communities
contribute to our country’s cultural, social, and
economic vitality.
That’s why, in 2013, we launched the new, fiveyear, $1.1 billion Roadmap for Official Languages,
the most comprehensive investment in Canada’s
national languages in our country’s history. The
Roadmap focuses on three key pillars – education,
immigration, and communities – to continue to
build the strength and vigour of minority language
communities in Canada.
Our commitment to Canada’s national languages
is unwavering.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

continue to implement our historic Roadmap
for Official Languages and support minority
language communities in Canada.

The Governor General proclaimed 2015 the “Year
of Sport” in Canada. And for good reason. Sport
makes us strive for excellence. Sport brings us
together as Canadians.
Our Conservative Government has been a proud
supporter of youth and amateur sport in Canada.
We established and expanded the Children’s Fitness
Tax Credit to support parents who choose to put
their children in sports. And each year we have
provided significant support – over $190 million to
date – to fund sport development and excellence.
This represents a funding increase of approximately
40 percent since we took office in 2006.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 132

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

And it’s working. Canada set a world record for
gold medals at the 2010 Winter Olympic Games
and we earned 217 medals at the recent Pan-Am
Games in Toronto.
With the Olympics coming up in 2016 and 2018,
there’s plenty of opportunity to continue to
showcase Canada’s athletic prowess.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

deliver on its plan to increase funding by $20
million over four years for Canada’s future
Olympians and Paralympians.

99
We'll also establish an expert panel to study
the potential scope of the Adult Fitness Tax
Credit, to support Canadians of all ages in
making healthy and active choices.

133 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Supporting Canada’s universal,
publicly-funded health care system
Our Conservative Government is committed to
a universal public health care system and the
Canada Health Act, and the right of the provinces
to deliver health care within their jurisdictions.
We've increased transfers to the provinces and
territories for health care to historically high
levels. In fact, no government in Canadian history
has provided more funding for health care, and it
continues to grow.
Unlike the previous Liberal Government, who
cut health care funding after running years of
deficits, we have increased health care transfers
to the provinces and territories by nearly 70
percent to all-time record levels.
The Canada Health Transfer is projected to grow
from $32.1 billion in 2014–15 to $40.9 billion
in 2019–20. This represents a projected total
additional investment of $27 billion over the next
five years.
134 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue to support Canada’s
universal public health care system
and increase health care funding to the
provinces and territories.

Palliative care is an important aspect of our
health care system that addresses a number
of issues of great significance to Canadian
families – providing comfort and dignity for a
person nearing death, and for his or her loved
ones, through pain management and emotional,
spiritual, cultural and psychological support.
A 2013 poll found that a large majority of
Canadians see palliative care as an important
priority for governments. Our Government
has supported the establishment of a more
robust system of palliative care across the
country, supporting health care professionals
and policymakers in their efforts to develop a

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

national approach to palliative care, and funding
training in palliative care for front-line health care
workers.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will build on this record by funding further
research into how palliative care is best
provided to Canadians. This research,
carried out in conjunction with the Canadian
Hospice Palliative Care Association, will
focus on veterans, through the Canadian
Institute for Military and Veteran Health
Research at Queen’s University, and First
Nations, through the Improving End-of-Life
Care in First Nations Communities project at
Lakehead University.

The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that
Canadians living with extreme pain and suffering
have the right to end their lives with the help of
a doctor. This is an extremely sensitive issue and
there are many considerations, including the
protection of freedom of conscience, that must be
part of the discussion.
We established a panel of eminent Canadians in
July to consult with medical authorities and with
interveners in the Supreme Court case to assist the
government in formulating a legislative response
to the court’s decision. The panel is scheduled to
provide its final report by late Fall 2015.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

consider the panel’s report as it determines
how best to respond to the Supreme Court
decision. Any legislation will be subject to a
free vote in Parliament.

We live in a time of rapid technological advances.
Dramatic breakthroughs in medical testing and
diagnosis mean we have unprecedented access
to the information stored in our genetic code. The
availability of this deeply personal data, combined
with a similar revolution in our ability to store,
analyse and use it, rightly gives many Canadians
reason for concern regarding its security, and the
potential for abuse.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 135

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

reintroduce legislation to amend the Human
Rights Act to prohibit discrimination on the
basis of genetic testing. The legislation
will also amend the Personal Information
Protection and Electronic Documents Act
and the Privacy Act to put strict conditions
on the collection, use and disclosure of
genetic information.

From Alzheimer’s to ALS, from Parkinson’s to MS,
from autism to epilepsy to PTSD, neurological
disorders will affect millions of Canadians during
their lifetimes, but the inner workings of the brain
remain one of science’s greatest mysteries.
In 2011, our Government established the Canada
Brain Research Fund, earmarking $100 million
to support Brain Canada’s own fundraising by
matching it dollar-for-dollar. The fund has supported
cutting-edge research into new diagnostics,
treatments, and cures for neurological diseases.

99
We’ll build on our support for Canadian

research excellence and Canadian families
affected by brain disease by renewing the
Canada Brain Research Fund when it expires
in 2017, with another $100 million over
seven years.

136 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Finding a cure
for cancer
Cancer is the leading cause of death in Canada,
and four out of every ten Canadians will be
diagnosed with some form of the disease in their
lifetimes. Unfortunately, most Canadians have
seen someone they love be forced to confront
this terrible disease.
But the number of people who survive a cancer
diagnosis is constantly rising, thanks to the hard
work and ingenuity of medical professionals and
researchers in Canada, and around the world.
Our Conservative Government is committed to
helping Canadians in their fight against cancer,
investing significantly over the years in research
through the Canadian Institute for Health
Research which funded $166 million in cancer
research in 2012-13 alone.
The Canadian Partnership against Cancer is
an independent organization that oversees
137 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control. Its
efforts include a diverse range of cancer-related
initiatives, including prevention, screening,
data gathering, research, guideline- and
standard-setting for governments and medical
professionals, and support for cancer patients
and survivors.
Our Conservative Government established the
Partnership in 2006 and renewed our initial
support in 2011.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will renew the mandate and funding of
the Canadian Partnership against Cancer
again in 2017, so it can continue its
important work of saving Canadian lives.

The Canadian Cancer Society has been a major
supporter of cancer-related research over its
76-year history. Its hard work and financial

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

support has significantly accelerated the impact
that research has had on our understanding of the
causes of cancer and what steps can be taken to
reduce its incidence.
The society has developed a plan to establish a
unique national centre of excellence in Vancouver
to support world-leading cancer research. We’ll
support it.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

provide capital funding to help establish
the Canadian Cancer Society’s Cancer
Prevention Centre, in conjunction with other
levels of government and donors.

Together with Canada’s
“cancer
community, the Ca-

nadian Partnership against
Cancer is enabling a coordinated approach to reducing
the cancer burden on Canadians. We thank the Conservative Party for their commitment to the national cancer
control strategy…

”

Shelly Jamieson, CEO, Canadian Partnership
against Cancer, (August 29, 2015).

99
And we’ll also match contributions to the

Terry Fox Foundation up to $35 million, with
the combined funds going to establish a
network of designated comprehensive cancer
centres across the country.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 138

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Protecting Canada’s
West Coast
Canada’s West Coast is a marvel of beauty
and a source of dynamic economic activity.
Our Conservative Government has taken steps
to promote and protect our coast, and also to
encourage the investment and job creation that
makes British Columbia a major economic driver
in our country.
There’s more we can do to protect our coastal
regions and support marine safety.
Derelict boats that have been abandoned
by their owners pose a serious challenge to
Canada’s coastal communities. Currently, such
vessels are removed by the Coast Guard or
Ministry of Transportation if there is an imminent
risk of environmental damage or if they are
obstructing navigation.
But otherwise, they sit – or drift – and rot,
potentially causing longer-term environmental
139 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

damage, endangering other craft on the
waters, and creating an eyesore in some of
Canada’s most beautiful places. According to
the Department of Transport Canada, there
are currently 245 such vessels in Canadian
coastal waters.
It is important that boat owners take
responsibility for these vessels. MP John Weston
of British Columbia has introduced a Private
Member’s Bill that makes it a criminal offence to
abandon a boat, subject to jail time and fines of
up to $100,000.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

commit to supporting MP Weston’s bill, and
also set aside funds to cover one third of the
cost of removing priority derelict vessels.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

The 2014 case of a Russian cargo ship losing
power and potentially running aground on the West
Coast was a powerful reminder of the importance
of coastal protection.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

increase maritime protection by acquiring
greater tugboat capacity on the West Coast.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 140

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Conservation and rural
economic development
Canada is a land of great beauty and great
bounty. Our identity, our geography and our
prosperity are interwoven in a vibrant Canadian
tapestry. Through careful stewardship, our
natural heritage has been a source of pleasure
and pride for generations of families.
At the same time, it has led to great opportunity
and reward for countless hard-working Canadians.
Indeed, farmers, landowners, hunters and anglers
were Canada’s first conservationists, and remain
its most passionate. Government schemes and
celebrity activists come and go, but the true,
patriot love ordinary Canadians hold for our great
country is eternal.
For many Canadians – and for many visitors
to this country – hunting and fishing are more
than longstanding Canadian traditions and
pleasant ways to experience the great outdoors.
In communities in all regions of the country,
141 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

particularly rural areas, they are vital contributors
to the local economy.
In fact, the countless hunters, anglers and other
outdoor enthusiasts who enjoy the Canadian
wilderness have turned these recreational
industries into businesses worth billions of
dollars every year. And for the men and women
who make their living in these industries,
conservation is key to prosperity.
That’s why we launched the National
Conservation Plan: to support the efforts of
Canadians to conserve Canada’s lands and
waters while promoting increased biodiversity;
to restore degraded ecosystems and protect
species at risk; and to connect Canadians with
our natural heritage, fostering a love for the
outdoors in future generations, including urban
Canadians, and cultivating a “community of
stewards” from coast to coast to coast.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

And that’s why we established the Hunting and
Angling Advisory Panel: to make sure that federal
conservation policy is informed by Canadians
who know and love our lands and waters best;
Canadians whose livelihoods are, in many cases,
inextricably linked to the sustainability of our
conservation efforts.
Our Conservative Government is committed to
continuing our partnerships with the people who
love our land, who protect and preserve its natural
spaces and the health of our environment, and
who create jobs and opportunity.
To this end, if re-elected, we’ll:

99
Create a Wildlife Conservation and

Enhancement Program to fund community
projects that improve habitat for species
harvested by hunters and trappers, such as
moose, deer, wild turkey, and migratory birds.

99
Commit new funding to helping Destination

Canada promote conservation and heritage
industries, in particular angling, hunting, and
snowmobiling.

are delighted to see
“theWeConservative
Party’s

commitment to the establishment of a Wildlife Conservation Enhancement Fund.

”

Angelo Lombardo, Executive Director,
Ontario Federation of Anglers and
Hunters, (September 4, 2015).

We are pleased this gov“ernment
understands the

huge role snowmobile tourism contributes to the winter
economy for Canada. These
funds will continue to grow
the $8 billion economic impact snowmobiling and world
class trails bring to Canada’s
winter economy.

”

Dale Hickox, President, Canadian Council
of Snowmobile Organizations, (September
4, 2015).

99
Enact new migratory bird regulations to

establish a family hunting permit and remove
other unnecessary barriers and irritants to
hunters, in time for the 2017 hunting season.

99
Ensure the approval of more firearms safety

instructors by using powers in the recentlypassed Common Sense Firearms Licensing Act.

99
And continue to fight any back-door efforts to
bring back the failed long-gun registry.

As part of our Conservative Government’s
conservation efforts, we've partnered with
the Pacific Salmon Foundation to ensure the
sustainable future of wild Pacific salmon and
their habitat.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 142

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

“

We welcome Prime Minister
Harper’s commitment if re-elected to invest $15 million in
estuary restoration in the Strait
of Georgia, Lower Fraser and
Harrison River and its tributaries.
These additional funds would
help us significantly expand
estuary restoration that the
Foundation is undertaking in
conjunction with our Salish
Sea Marine Survival Project,
which is focused on research
and restoration of Pacific
salmon fisheries in the Strait
of Georgia.

”

Pacific Salmon Foundation (August 21,
2015).

It’s been a productive partnership and, if re-elected,
we'll work with the Pacific Salmon Foundation to:

99
Restore estuaries in the Lower Mainland and
on Vancouver Island.

99
And preserve the lower Harrison River and

its tributaries as a salmon “stronghold” by
completing salmon spawning and rearing
habitat, along with other conservation
measures.

Conservatives do not believe that conservation
and recreation have to be contradictory; indeed,
we believe Canada is strongest when they are
complementary.
And we believe that prudent management applied
in the context of a conservation ethic will ensure
that Canadians and our environment thrive in
concert for generations to come.

143 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Preserving our natural
heritage
Our Conservative Government has made it a
priority to increase the amount of Canadian
territory, both land and water, set aside for
conservation purposes, and for the enjoyment
of Canadians for generations to come.
We've expanded the Nahanni National Park
Reserve in the Northwest Territories sixfold.
We have added territory almost twice the size of
Vancouver Island to the list of federal protected
areas, including the world’s first protected area
extending from mountain peaks to the sea floor –
the Gwaii Haanas National Marine Conservation
Area Reserve and Haida Heritage Site – and the
world’s largest protected freshwater area, the
Lake Superior National Marine Conservation Area.
We've protected more than 4,500 square
kilometres of land and sea in Nunavut, by
creating three national Wildlife Areas.
144 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

We've created three New Marine Conservation
Areas, one in each of Canada’s oceans.
And we've created, and expanded, Rouge
National Urban Park. Rouge Park is the first of
its kind in Canada, and one of the largest urban
parks in the world – 13 times the size of New
York’s Central Park, and 33 times the size of
Hyde Park in London.
A re-elected Conservative Government will build
on this record of conservation and preservation
by moving ahead with plans to expand our
network of protected wilderness places.

99
We’ll establish the Southern Strait of

Georgia National Marine Conservation
Area between the British Columbia
mainland and Vancouver Island, in
consultation with the Government of
British Columbia.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

99
We’ll take final steps to complete the creation
of Thaidene Nene National Park on Great
Slave Lake in the Northwest Territories.

99
And we’ll complete the protection of the

globally unique sponge reefs off the coast of
British Columbia, by establishing the Hecate
Strait and Queen Charlotte Sound Glass
Sponge Reefs Marine Protected Area.

Canada is host to 17 exceptional World Heritage
sites which represent some of humanity’s most
outstanding achievements and nature’s most
beautiful and ecologically important landscapes.
These sites range from Nahanni National Park
Reserve in Northwest Territories to the Historic
District of Old Québec and present Canada’s
stories of international significance to the world.
Currently Canada’s Tentative List for World
Heritage Sites, which is an inventory of candidate
sites to be considered for designation by the World
Heritage Committee, only has seven potential sites
on it and has not been updated in over a decade.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

launch a Call for Proposals so that Canadians
and communities across the country can
nominate their unique and exceptional
places for consideration as future World
Heritage sites.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 145

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Tackling climate change
Canadians are committed to an effective
approach to climate change, and so are we.
We support an approach that benefits both the
environment and the economy. The solution
to the climate change challenge must come
from innovation, not deprivation – through
technology and Canadian ingenuity, not by
closing down our vital natural resources
industries or imposing job-killing carbon taxes.
And our approach is working. Canada has
become a global leader in clean energy, and we
are the first government in Canadian history to
achieve an absolute reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions through responsible sector-bysector regulation.
In 2012, Canada was the first major coal user
to ban the construction of traditional coal-fired
electricity generation units.

146 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

And we've committed to ambitious greenhouse
gas emission reductions by 2030, in advance of
the upcoming United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Paris later this year.
But we cannot go it alone. Canada is responsible
for less than 2 percent of global emissions. The
solutions to climate change must be global,
enacted in concert with our international
partners. That's why we've invested significantly
in supporting developing nations as they find
ways to reduce their emissions.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will
continue to balance what’s best for our
climate with the needs of our economy,
recognizing the importance of both the
environment and our economy to all
Canadians.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

99
We’ll continue with our plan for careful,

well-designed regulations and support for
companies and researchers to develop
new, cleaner technologies. And our low-tax,
balanced budget plan to strengthen and grow
Canada’s economy will create the conditions
for this type of cutting-edge innovation.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 147

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Supporting economic and social
development for Aboriginal Canadians
As Canada’s first peoples, Aboriginal Canadians
must share in the successes of our modern-day
nation. We have taken steps toward that goal,
but it's an ongoing journey.
We believe the path forward lies in creating
stronger, more self-reliant communities through
improvements in economic development, land
management strategies, and education.
The opportunity is there. For example, in our
natural resource industries, a labour shortage
looms and highly trained and skilled Aboriginal
Canadians are an important part of the solution.
First Nations people should be able to claim a
future as promising as any other Canadian, and
we’re working to make it happen.
To this end, our Conservative Government has
taken significant action to promote the economic
and social well-being of Canada’s First Nations.
148 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

This includes:

99
Increasing investment in Aboriginal
education by 25 percent.

99
Constructing 41 new schools and funding
over 500 schools.

99
Increasing health funding by 31 percent.
99
Enacting the First Nations Financial

Transparency Act to increase
accountability and transparency of First
Nations governance.

These practical steps and important investments
are improving the lives of Canada’s First
Nations. But there is more we can do to help our
Aboriginal communities thrive and flourish.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Some First Nations have expressed an interest in
exploring the possibility of legislation that would
allow private property ownership within current
reserve boundaries while preserving existing
governance and tax policy structures.
The Whispering Pines/Clinton Indian Band, near
Kamloops and Clinton in BC, has asked that the
government move ahead with legislation that
would allow it to establish a property ownership
regime.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

enact legislation that allows this specific
band to move forward in this way. If other
First Nation bands also choose to pursue
this option on a voluntary, opt-in basis, we'll
proceed with similar legislation for them.

Our band doesn’t just
“strongly
support the

proposal for First Nations
property ownership legislation,
but we also are of the First
Nations that created it. As
chief of my community, I can
assure you that this legislation
is First Nations-led. We want
what other Canadians have:
title we can leave to our future
generations.

”

Michael LeBourdais, Chief, Whispering
Pines/Clinton Indian Band, (October 9,
2015).

As part of Prime Minister Harper’s historic apology to
the former students of Indian Residential Schools,
we established the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission to educate all Canadians about the
Indian Residential Schools system and to offer
recommendations on how to improve the well-being
of Canada’s Aboriginal population.
While we don’t yet have the final report, a re-elected
Conservative Government will take immediate
action to address some of the key themes set out in
its preliminary recommendations including:

99
Mandating the Mental Health Commission

of Canada to focus on addiction and suicide
prevention with particular attention on
Canada’s First Nations communities.

99
Targeting palliative care research funding
to focus on services in First Nations
communities.

99
Supporting rural broadband expansion with a

particular focus on First Nations communities
to promote economic development.

99
Expanding anti-gang programming to help atrisk youth who are drawn to urban gangs.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 149

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

“

This new contribution to
Indspire through Economic
Action Plan 2015 signals
the Government of Canada’s
continued commitment to
advancing education for Indigenous youth, the country’s fastest growing demographic. The
primary barrier for Indigenous
students in completing their
post-secondary education is
a lack of financial resources.
Through this funding, Indspire
will help lift this burden for
thousands of Indigenous
students across the country,
enabling them to graduate.
As shown by our recent report
on graduation rates, 93% of
students funded by Indspire
are graduating.

”

Roberta Jamieson, President and CEO,
Indspire (April 21, 2015).

99
Increasing funding to support the

preservation and promotion of traditional
Aboriginal languages.

These practical, common-sense policies build on
Economic Action Plan 2015’s support for Aboriginal
education and skills-training including:

99
New funding for Aboriginal labour market

programs such as the Skills and Partnership
Fund to provide skills development and
training for Aboriginal peoples, in partnership
with businesses.

99
Ongoing support for Aboriginal post-

secondary bursaries in partnership with
Indspire, an Aboriginal-led national charity
dedicated to helping First Nations students
receive post-secondary education.

Our Conservative Government introduced the
First Nations Control of First Nations Education
Act to improve K-12 educational outcomes for
First Nations students. The legislation was rooted
in a historic agreement with the Assembly of
First Nations and was backed by significant new
funding for core education programming, including
language and cultural programming.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

remains committed to working with willing
First Nations partners and provinces to
improve First Nations educational outcomes
so that students living on reserve are better
placed to reach their full potential.

150 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Strengthening Canadian
citizenship
Our Government has always made it a priority
to strengthen and protect the value of Canadian
citizenship, making clear that citizenship
comes not just with rights, but significant
responsibilities.
That’s why we committed additional resources
to the RCMP and Citizenship and Immigration
officials to investigate cases in which individuals
obtained Canadian citizenship through
fraudulent means, including some who had
never even set foot in Canada.
Then, last year, we made the first comprehensive
reforms to the Citizenship Act in a generation,
moving to speed up the process of attaining
citizenship for people who have earned it, while
modernizing requirements to ensure that new
citizens are fully capable of participating in
Canadian society.

151 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

This legislation also allows the Government
to revoke citizenship from dual citizens who
are convicted of terrorism, high treason, or
spying, or who take up arms against Canada,
and to streamline the process of removing
citizenship from individuals who obtain it
under false pretenses.
Because of this streamlined process,
Citizenship and Immigration officials have the
capacity to deal with such cases going forward.
But, due to the onerous process for revocation
under the previous legislation, there remains a
backlog of cases needing to be processed.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will
provide increased funding to Citizenship
and Immigration Canada to clear this
backlog over a two-year period.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

In 2014, 3,121 citizenship ceremonies were
held across Canada, welcoming more than
262,000 new citizens. This is the largest number
of new Canadians welcomed in a single year in
the history of Canada, and double the number
welcomed in 2013. Canada has one of the highest
naturalization rates in the world: more than
85 percent of permanent residents eligible for
Canadian citizenship become Canadians.
The Oath of Citizenship is a solemn declaration
in which citizenship candidates promise to obey
Canadian laws, while fulfilling their duties and
responsibilities as Canadian citizens. The Oath
recognizes that Canadian citizenship confers both
rights and responsibilities.
A majority of Canadians believe that new citizens
should be seen and heard at the moment they join
the Canadian family. That’s why, this past June,
our Government introduced a bill requiring all
individuals seeking to become Canadians to show
their faces while taking the Oath of Citizenship. We
believe it's critically important that, at the moment
an individual joins the Canadian family, they do so
freely and openly, rather than hiding their identity.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government will

reintroduce and pass the Oath of Citizenship
Act requiring citizenship candidates to be
seen and heard when reciting the Oath in
community with others, to confirm their
commitment as new citizens to Canada's
laws and values.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 152

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

Protecting Canada’s
democracy
Canadians are proud of our democracy and
our democratic institutions. They’re the
foundation of our system of government and
one of the reasons for our country’s prosperity
and success. Canada has one of the most
accountable and transparent governments in
the world. From its founding moment, our party
has been relentless in its pursuit of increased
accountability in government. And, if re-elected,
we’ll continue our efforts to protect and
strengthen Canada’s democracy.
An unelected Senate is simply not acceptable in
a modern democracy. Stephen Harper has fought
long and hard for Senate reform.
We’ve sought to advance legislation to impose
term limits and establish a democratic process
for electing senators. Yet the Supreme Court has
blocked these reforms by ruling that they must
be initiated and supported by the provinces.
153 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

We continue to believe that the Senate must be
reformed. If it can’t be reformed, it should be
abolished. Our Conservative Government has
made no appointments in the last two and a half
years. The result is 22 vacancies and $6 million
in savings for taxpayers so far, relative to 2010.

99
A re-elected Conservative Government

will continue this policy. We’ll do nothing
further to entrench an unelected,
unaccountable Senate. Instead, we’ll
impose a moratorium on further Senate
appointments until real reform is achieved.

This election is about protecting our fragile
economy in a global economy that’s weak and
in turmoil. But both the Liberals and the NDP
are focused on other things, including sweeping
changes to how governments are elected. The
Liberals have even said they'd make it one of
their first priorities if elected.

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

The Liberals and NDP would make these changes
to our democratic system and impose them on
Canadians without consultation because when
Canadians are asked – as they have been in
Ontario, British Columbia, and Prince Edward
Island – they've chosen the status quo.
We believe our Westminster-style democracy
has served our country well for almost 150
years, and that any decision that would lead to
a fundamental change must reflect the clearly
expressed will of Canadians.

99
A re-elected Harper Government will introduce
legislation enshrining this principle in law,
requiring any future government to hold a
referendum on major electoral reforms.

Our Government is firmly committed to Canadian
federalism. We’re the only party that respects the
jurisdiction of provinces and we have provided
unprecedented funding to provinces and territories
to help them deliver on their responsibilities in
health care and education.
Our vision of federalism respects provincial
jurisdiction while recognizing Quebec as a nation
within a unified Canada. We have taken steps to
keep Canada united while preserving Quebec’s
culture and linguistic values, including granting the
province its own seat at UNESCO.

99
We know that Canadians are not interested

in re-opening the Constitution, and neither
are we. The Conservative Party understands
this more than any other party and will
continue to focus on the real concerns of
Canadians – creating jobs and protecting
and strengthening our economy.

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 154

 OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES

AT RISK
Our Conservative Government understands that
protecting Canada’s economy and creating jobs
is the basis for strong, dynamic communities.
Our Government has been focused on creating
economic opportunities and jobs in communities of
all sizes, from major urban centres to rural towns.
A strong economy means strong families and
strong communities.
The Liberals and NDP would run deficits, hike taxes
and leave our economy exposed to instabilities
elsewhere in the world. This would cost families money
and put jobs at risk. And, in addition, both the Liberals
and the NDP have made promises that would hurt
communities and set families back. They’ll do this by:
Running deficits that will ultimately
necessitate massive tax hikes and spending
cuts to key programs Canadians depend upon
such as health care and education.
Driving up the price of everything Canadian
families buy – including gasoline – by
imposing carbon pricing schemes on the
Canadian economy.
Threatening Canada’s economic prospects
by shutting down responsible resource
development.
Bringing back the costly, wasteful, and
ineffective long-gun registry to penalize lawabiding hunters instead of criminals.
Repealing our important reforms that have
strengthened Canadian citizenship and
reaffirmed Canadian values.

155 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 COSTING OUR PLAN

Costing our plan
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY

Advanced Manufacturing Hub

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

20.0

20.0

20.0

100.0

100.0

Manufacturing Technology Demonstration Program
Automotive Innovation Fund
Apprentice Job Creation Tax Credit

60.0

60.0

60.0

60.0

Skilled Trades Job Experience Program

10.0

10.0

10.0

10.0

Foreign Credential Recognition Loans

8.0

8.0

8.0

8.0

Agri-Innovation Fund

33.0

33.0

33.0

Lobster Branding

5.0

5.0

5.0

Lobster Biomass Research

1.6

1.6

1.6

Forestry Promotion

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit

45.0

45.0

45.0

45.0

Enhanced Mineral Exploration Tax Credit

15.0

15.0

15.0

15.0

Quebec Maritime Prosperity Initiative

19.0

19.0

19.0

20.0

30.0

50.0

Rural Broadband
Nutrition North

8.0

8.0

8.0

8.0

Wood Buffalo Highway

0.5

1.0

2.0

6.4

214.1

254.6

365.6

331.4

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

30.0

30.0

30.0

185.0

740.0

925.0

1480.0

Data on Foreign Speculation in Real Estate

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

Single Seniors Tax Credit

23.0

117.0

214.0

315.0

Registered Disabilty Savings Plan

35.0

40.0

45.0

Registered Education Savings Plan

45.0

47.0

50.0

TOTAL

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR HARD-WORKING FAMILIES AND SENIORS
2016-17

First-Time Home Buyers' Plan
Home Renovation Tax Credit

Adoption Expense Tax Credit

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

Maternity/Parental Benefit reform

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

214.5

973.5

1262.5

1926.5

TOTAL

156 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 COSTING OUR PLAN

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR A MORE SECURE CANADA
2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Kanishka Project

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

Office of Religious Freedom

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Child, Early, and Forced Marriage

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Financial Task Action Force - Ukraine

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

Digital Freedom Fund

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Special Operation Forces

10.0

15.0

20.0

30.0

Canadian Reservists

20.0

40.0

105.0

College Militaire Royal de St Jean

4.0

4.0

4.0

HMCS Discovery

10.0

10.0

25.0

Canadian Patrol Craft - Great Lakes

10.0

20.0

30.0

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

25.0

74.0

109.0

209.0

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

National Anti-Drug Strategy

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Youth Gang Prevention Fund

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Online Counterfeit

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Habitat for Humanity/CORCAN

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Protecting Children and Victims

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking

12.0

12.0

12.0

12.0

RCMP Integrated Teams and Tipline

11.5

11.5

11.5

11.5

41.5

41.5

41.5

41.5

Canadian Junior Rangers
TOTAL

OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR SAFE STREETS

TOTAL

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 157

 COSTING OUR PLAN

Costing our plan
OUR CONSERVATIVE PLAN FOR STRONG COMMUNITIES
Earning Loss Benefit Reform

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

9.0

9.0

9.0

9.0

30.0

30.0

30.0

Tax Credit for Service Club Memberships
Maple Leaf Designation

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Diefenbaker Home

0.3

0.1

0.1

0.1

Local Museums Program

5.0

5.0

10.0

15.0

Palliative Care Research

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Brain Canada Rearch Fund

15.0

15.0

15.0

Canadian Partnership against Cancer

50.0

50.0

50.0

BC Cancer Prevention Research Centre

4.0

4.0

4.5

Terry Fox Research Institute

5.0

10.0

10.0

10.0

Derelict Boats Fund

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Tug Boat Capacity on the West Coast

8.0

10.0

12.0

Wildlife Conservation and Enhancement Program

5.0

5.0

5.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Tourism Funding for Angling, Hunting, and Snowmobiling

3.0

Pacific Salmon Conservation
Strait of Georgia Marine Conservation Area

3.5

3.5

3.5

3.5

Aboriginal Language Programming

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

Citizenship "Surge" Funding

5.7

5.7

43.0

160.8

162.6

165.1

538.1

1504.4

1941.2

2673.5

TOTAL

TOTAL NEW PLATFORM SPENDING

158 - Our Conservative plan to protect the economy

 COSTING OUR PLAN

TRANS-PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP IMPLEMENTATION
2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Quota Value Guarantee Program

150.0

150.0

150.0

Income Guarantee Program 

36.0

50.0

69.0

49.0

70.0

103.0

103.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

52.0

259.0

306.0

325.0

590.1

1763.4

2247.2

2998.5

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

1700.0

2600.0

2600.0

4800.0

1000.0

1000.0

2000.0

3000.0

2700.0

3600.0

4600.0

7800.0

590.1

1763.4

2247.2

2998.5

565.0

580.0

595.0

610.0

2674.9

2416.6

2947.8

5411.5

1000.0

1000.0

2000.0

3000.0

1674.9

1416.6

947.8

2411.5

Processor Modernization and Marketing Fund
Agri-Marketing Program
TOTAL

TOTAL NEW SPENDING
Final Budget Baseline
Contingency
2015 Budget Pre-Contingency
New Platform Spending
One-Year Operating Freeze
Planning Surplus
Contingency

BUDGET BALANCE

Our Conservative plan to protect the economy - 159

 