    

\Qmm:

O.H 


EODXM. 

 


?'?tntuunll 

Il?ll?dill?l4lIllg?l'JIAT HEART,
I AM AN OPTIMIST. 
Though my job constantly requires me to look to the challenges and dangers on the
horizon, I know that Canadians working together can solve any problem, overcome any
hurdle. I think that is what makes us Canadian – a profound faith that together, through
hard work, compassion and cooperation, we can build a better future.
This platform is about Canada. Our democracy, our economy, our communities – our future. This platform is about
people, each and every one of us, and the role we play in our country and the essential services we all need to live
safe, happy, fulfilled, and enriched lives.
I know many may think of the Green Party as a single issue party – yet, nothing could be further from the truth.
Granted, you know me as someone who for the past forty years has stood firm to protect the air we all breathe,
the water we drink, and the land that sustains us. But you also know me as a staunch defender of democracy,
of economic policies that make sense, of fairness and openness, of justice and equity.
Have a look at what we are proposing to build a Canada that works together, but don’t stop there. Ask
the tough questions of how we will work in the next parliament in collaboration with all parties to do what’s
best for Canadians and our country. Then ask the other leaders those same tough questions. You deserve
answers – promises are just not good enough.
Our platform is organized around four key issue areas: economy, communities, government, and climate.
The policies within have been developed democratically, by people from all walks of Canadian life, from every
province, territory, and traditional land.
Canadians inspire me. As Leader of the Green Party, I want to work for citizens to be heard. I want to work to help
people who need help, and support small business and local communities as we grow stronger. Canadians in
this election, more than ever, can vote from hope and from conviction, not from fear. In this platform you will find
optimism, confidence, and sensible Canadian-made plans for a better future.
I hope they inspire you to join us, and to vote Green on October 19.

Elizabeth May
Leader, Green Party of Canada

GREEN PARTY 2015

3

 BUILDING A
CANADA THAT WORKS.
TOGETHER.
OUR VISION FOR A STRONG, SECURE,
AND SUSTAINABLE CANADA.

4

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

 In a world filled with conflict and uncertainty, Canada stands as an island of peace,
freedom, and stability.
Canadians are a people united by cooperation,
hard work, and mutual respect. We know that it is
our families, our communities, and our teamwork that
make us strong. We view the diversity of our nation
not as a liability, but rather as a shared strength
and source of pride.
Together, we have built one of the wealthiest
countries in the world, blessed with a skilled and
resourceful population, abundant natural resources,
and a highly productive economy. We have built a
country with universal health care, public education,
a social safety net that safeguards us in times of
hardship, and a public pension plan that provides
us security in retirement.
But, in recent years, the national values, natural
environment, and individual qualities that allowed us
to build the Canada we know and love have come
under threat.
The Harper Conservatives have skewed and
weakened the Canadian economy, focusing solely
on higher polluting industries, instead of on creating
good, stable, high-paying jobs. They have failed our
communities by slashing funding to critical public
services, instead subsidizing foreign multinational
corporations and providing tax cuts to the wealthiest
few. They have granted special privileges to
foreign corporations and made us subservient to
the interests of foreign investors. They have failed
to unite us in the face of conflict and uncertainty,
instead cynically opting to divide our nation for
partisan gain. They have failed to act in the face of
an ever-growing climate crisis, instead gambling our
future on more pipelines, more fracking, and risky
tankers on our coasts.
This platform lays out a plan to move Canada forward,
to overcome the last ten years, and restore the shared
values and principles that built the country we love.
Our economic plan invests in people and creates
good jobs, focusing on skills, knowledge, and
sustainable resource development. Our plan
envisions strong communities as the foundation of a

strong country, and will provide the investments in
infrastructure, education, and health care necessary
to make that vision a reality.
Our plan proposes democratic reforms that
will make our politicians more accountable, our
parliament more accessible, and our voting system
more representative. Our plan takes bold climate
action, by embracing the solutions that we already
know work, encouraging research into those we have
yet to discover, and increasing the taxes paid by
corporate polluters.
We understand that in a federation like Canada, no
one level of government and no one political party has
all the answers. Canada stands apart from every other
industrialized country in lacking any national goals or
strategy to respond to pressing issues. We are the only
country in the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) with no national policy for
energy, housing, education, transportation, health
care, climate, or culture.
We need to reinvent the way we make decisions.
Greens will press for the creation of a Council
of Canadian Governments. Building on the First
Ministers’ Conference (a body ignored by Stephen
Harper), we will convene a council comprised of
federal, provincial-territorial, municipal-local, as well
as First Nations, Métis and Inuit leaders. Gathered
around the same table, national goals will be
developed, publicly and transparently. Each level of
government will then implement that part of the plan
within its jurisdiction. Policy alignment will ensure the
wise use of public dollars. All levels of government,
pulling in the same direction, will put Canada on
the path to a prosperous, sustainable future built on
fairness and justice.
Green Members of Parliament, united by this
vision for Canada, will be your local champions
in Ottawa – working on behalf of you, your family,
and your community. 
It’s time to build a Canada that works. Together.

GREEN PARTY 2015

5

 OUR KEY
COMMITMENTS 
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY

STRONG COMMUNITIES

BECAUSE TOMORROW
IS SERIOUS BUSINESS.

BECAUSE CANADA
DEPENDS ON IT.

10 

18 

Defend Canada’s public health care

19 

Implement a National Seniors Strategy

20 

Eliminate poverty and challenge inequality 

10 
13 

14 

Establish a Canadian Sustainable
Generations Fund
Roll out a National Sustainable Jobs Plan
Slash Canada’s student debt today,
and abolish tuition fees for college,
university, and skills training programs
for students and their families
Partner with First Nations for truly
responsible resource development
in the long-term public interest

14 

Put Canadian small businesses first

15 

Support healthy local food
and food security

6

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

21 
22 
23 
23 

Strong First Nations and Indigenous
communities
Re-invest in the CBC and Radio-Canada,
Canadian arts and culture, television and film
Protect Canada Post
Ensure safety, defense, and disaster
preparedness for our communities

 GOOD GOVERNMENT

BOLD ACTION ON CLIMATE

BECAUSE IT’S TIME TO
RESTORE DEMOCRACY.

BECAUSE WE LIVE HERE.

26 

26 
28 
29 

36 
Elect Members of Parliament who are
honest, ethical, hard-working representatives
for their constituents and champions for
their communities
Restore Canadian science and the role
of evidence-based decision making
Create a Council of Canadian Governments
to set national goals and priorities in
collaboration with all levels of government
Repeal Bill C-51 to defend Canadians’
Charter rights and privacy

30 

Fix our electoral system

31 

Defend Canada’s sovereignty

31 

36 
39 
39 
40 
40 

Defend our coastal waters from risky
pipelines and oil tankers
Halt oil sands expansion
Implement a robust Canadian Climate
and Energy Strategy
Create a National Transportation Strategy
with strict new rules on rail safety
End thermal coal exports
Demonstrate climate leadership at the
United Nations Climate Summit in Paris

Reverse Harper’s legacy and get
our country back

OUR DETAILED ACTION PLAN

GREEN PARTY 2015

7

 25> 
I <>Z_mm

 

SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY
BECAUSE TOMORROW
IS SERIOUS BUSINESS.
Canada is teetering on a recession for the second
time since Stephen Harper became prime minister. His
ill-advised political pledge to eliminate the deficit he
created, just in time for this election, is now risking a
deepening recession.

re-invested, not working at all. Dead money. Old-line
parties have ignored places to fund needed programs
and instead claim there is no new money for health care
services, education, pensions, infrastructure, public safety,
or scientific research.

Despite Conservative mismanagement, our economic
fundamentals remain sound. We have the technology,
we have the people, and we have the resources. We
are one of the wealthiest nations in the world in every
sense of the word. Today, our economy produces
50 percent more wealth per capita than it did a
generation ago. 

There is a serious disconnect between the
unprecedented wealth produced by the Canadian
economy and the increasing economic insecurity of
Canadians. We must take decisive action to build a
sustainable economy that benefits all Canadians over
the long-term.

Nevertheless, Canadians are feeling more squeezed
economically than ever before. Despite a shift to twoincome households, the current generation of young
families faces increasing costs for housing, education,
and childcare, and unprecedented household debt.
For the first time in our history, older Canadians are
saying that their children will not enjoy the same
standard of living as they did at the same age.
Meanwhile, our political leaders repeat the mantra that
government cupboards are bare. Deep cuts in the tax
rate for large corporations have led to a hoarding of cash
in big business bank accounts. The former Governor of
the Bank of Canada called it “dead money” – and there’s
a lot of it. Over $600 billion, equivalent to 32 percent of
our GDP, is held in corporate bank accounts – not being

We need to immediately build those sectors that benefit
from the lower Canadian dollar – manufacturing, tourism,
value-added forest products and cultural industries.
We need to resurrect federal engagement in tourism
promotion and support. We need to embrace the 21st
century economic revolution of clean technology.
These steps will assist in confronting the biggest threat
to our economic future – the decline in the Harper years
of Canadian productivity. For the first time since records
have been kept, Canada is falling far behind the U.S. in
productivity. More R & D and innovation will come from
manufacturing and clean technology. We are a nation
of innovators. While Harper’s policies reversed our
economic progress, hitching us to our 19th century role
as hewers of wood and drawers of water, Canadians are
ready for a sustainable, clean 21st century economy.

BECAUSE TOMORROW IS SERIOUS BUSINESS,
OUR TOP ECONOMIC PRIORITIES ARE TO:

GREEN PARTY 2015

9

 1

ESTABLISH A CANADIAN SUSTAINABLE GENERATIONS FUND
Secure Canada’s economic leadership over the coming decade by creating a fund to invest
in skills-training, education, energy efficiency, renewables, and emerging technologies.
We will capitalize this fund by expanding revenue
through returning corporate tax rates on large corporations to the 2009 level (19 percent), eliminating tax
havens and tax credits used by the extremely wealthy,
taxing pollution and waste, increasing the efficiency of
our tax system, and working with provinces to increase
resource extraction royalties.
The time has come to redesign our tax system for
the 21st century economy. As a starting point, in line
with fundamental principles of fairness, efficiency
and equity, we will eliminate the exemptions, special

2

cases and tax breaks for favoured interests. These
boutique tax cuts have complicated our tax code,
needlessly increasing complexity. We must ensure
the tax system helps, not hinders, Canadians. These
changes will ensure that we capture and secure
economic benefits for all Canadians.
Canada is one of the safest places in the world to
invest. Rather than investing abroad, the majority of
the Canadian Sustainable Generations Fund will be
invested here in Canada – in Canadian jobs, education,
infrastructure, small-business, and communities.

ROLL OUT A NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE JOBS PLAN
Put Canadians to work by investing in well-paying, local, and sustainable jobs in our communities.
Building a sustainable economy is serious business.
Boom and bust cycles in the extractive industries
have taken a heavy toll on Canadian families and
communities, and it’s long past time for us to invest
in reliable, long-term, local jobs.
The Canadian Sustainable Generations Fund will
make critical investments in trades, apprenticeships,
and education, and will ensure that all Canadians
have the skills and training to prosper today and
contribute to building the Canada of tomorrow.
These investments in skills training will complement
targeted national infrastructure investments in energy
efficiency, renewable energy production, digital
upgrades, clean-tech manufacturing, tourism, the
creative economy, and emerging technologies.
The gap between the infrastructure funding our cities
and towns need, and the funding they receive, is
reaching crisis levels – Canada’s infrastructure deficit is
estimated to be upwards of $350-billion. We will work to
close this gap by committing $6.4 billion per year, one
point of the GST, to municipal infrastructure – providing
stable, long-term funding to Canadian municipalities,
creating good local jobs, and building vibrant, safe, and
livable Canadian towns and cities.

10

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

We will create a Canadian Infrastructure Bank
to provide more robust and innovative financing
and investment partnerships, in order to build
safer bridges, better roads, world-class water
treatment facilities, affordable housing, efficient
public transportation, and expanded broadband
access – putting thousands of Canadians to work
in the process.
We will create additional sustainable jobs by reintroducing and expanding the home renovation
tax credit, to create incentives for individuals and
companies to make their homes and businesses more
efficient and accessible by installing high-efficiency
insulation, solar heating and electricity, energyefficient appliances, and accessibility upgrades. And
we will unleash an army of carpenters, electricians
and contractors to take outdated and leaky public
buildings – schools, universities and hospitals – and
plug the leaks that increase greenhouse gases and
costs. These changes alone will reduce carbon
emissions by 30 percent nationwide.

 FRAN HUNT JINNOUCHI



 

COURTENAY ALBERNI

It’s time to break the status quo on education in Canada
and abolish tuition fees for college, university and skills
training programs.

3

SLASH CANADA’S STUDENT DEBT TODAY, AND ABOLISH TUITION FEES FOR
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS AND THEIR FAMILIES
It’s time to break the status quo on education in
Canada and abolish tuition fees for college, university
and skills training programs. Whether Germany,
Austria, Norway, Sweden, or Finland, many of the
world’s most successful economies have proven that
expanding the public education system to include
post-secondary increases prosperity, equality,
productivity, and economic competitiveness. 
We will start investing in Canada’s future by
abolishing tuition fees for students without adequate
financial means, including removing the inadequate
2% annual cap on increased funding for post
secondary education for all First Nations and Inuit
students. Through consultation and collaboration
with provincial governments and universities and
colleges, by 2020 we will abolish tuition fees for
post-secondary education and skills training for
Canadians, guaranteeing that income is never a
barrier for qualified students. It is widely recognized
that Canada’s success depends on an educated
population, yet we burden youth with tens of
thousands of dollars in student debt.
As our plan to abolish tuition fees is being phased
in, we will invest in the success of current students,
jumpstart the Canadian economy, and give our

graduates a hand-up by implementing a debtforgiveness program. Our plan will eliminate any
existing or future student federal debt above
$10,000. We will abolish charging interest on new
student loans and will increase available funding
for bursaries.
It is unacceptable to the Green Party, and should
be unacceptable to every Canadian, that the
unemployment rate among Canadian youth is
twice the national average. The actual youth
unemployment rate is likely much higher as many
young people have given up on finding that first
job and are no longer counted.
Investment in Canadian skills, training, and education
is a proven means to create real jobs, and is the
backbone of Canada’s future as a sustainability
superpower. But for many young people just getting
out of school, they face a Catch-22. They cannot
get hired in new jobs because they lack experience.
But unless they get that first job, they’ll never have
experience. Greens will create a national Community
and Environment Service Corps, which will provide
$1 billion/year to municipalities to hire Canadian
youth to do work that needs to be done.

GREEN PARTY 2015

13

 4

PARTNERING WITH FIRST NATIONS FOR TRULY RESPONSIBLE RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT IN THE LONG-TERM PUBLIC INTEREST
Building a new era of nation-to-nation respect and partnership starts with recognizing
First Nations’ inherent rights and title.
We will work together to negotiate comprehensive
Indigenous self-governance arrangements, and bury
the Indian Act. Our Council of Canadian Governments
will, for the first time, engage First Nations, Metis and
Inuit leadership as full partners in inter-governmental
decision-making – for the good of us all and not
solely on indigenous issues.

Truly responsible resource development means
securing Canada’s endowment of living systems and
natural wealth, by setting strict rules on industrial
development to eliminate waste and environmental
pollution, limiting foreign control over Canadian
resources, and putting an end to high-risk plans for
new raw bitumen export pipelines and tankers.

We recognize that First Nations communities have
been at the forefront of stalling irresponsible resource
development projects like the Enbridge pipeline. We
will work with First Nations and with the provinces to
ensure that the responsible development of Canada’s
natural-resource wealth benefits all Canadians,
beginning with the consent of the peoples on whose
traditional territories they exist.

By investing heavily in advanced skills training,
expanding support for trades and apprentice
programs, and capturing additional value by
processing resources here in Canada, we will
create good jobs in the resource sector and in
local communities. All while ensuring Canadians
who call this place home have a say in
developing our resources.

5

PUTTING CANADIAN SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS FIRST
Ensure Canadian small business owners and entrepreneurs have access to the funds
they need to create local jobs and revitalize local economies.
Small businesses and the Canadians who own them
are the central driver of our economy. They create
more jobs than any other part of our economy. And
those incomes and profits remain in the community,
providing stable employment. As an added bonus,
their flexible nature allows them to respond to
environmental and market demands well before
large corporations take action.
Putting Canadian small businesses first means reducing
red tape for small business owners and enacting “Think
Small First” legislation to ensure that new federal
laws and regulations enhance, rather than hinder, an
economic environment where local businesses and
entrepreneurs can thrive.

14

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

We will create federally-funded $1 billion per year
Green Technology Commercialization Grants
to accelerate emerging technologies and give
Canadian entrepreneurs a head start. By facilitating
increased access to early-stage financing, the Green
Technology Commercialization Grant will help our
entrepreneurs compete internationally. It will help
good ideas and emerging technology get to market,
growing our sustainable economy and creating good
local jobs and opportunities in our communities.

 6

SUPPORTING LOCAL FOOD AND SMALL-SCALE PRODUCERS
In a time of dominance by global industrial food systems, we want to rebalance the equation
by creating resilient local economies fueled by local growers, farmers, and producers.
Markets for local and organic food are growing
rapidly, and a new generation of young Canadians
want to try their hand at farming, yet starting out
remains a daunting prospect, requiring financial
risk that many young would-be farmers are
unwilling to take. 
We believe that Canadians who want to enter into
agriculture should be supported to do so. We will
fund community supported agriculture, farmers’
markets, small-scale farms and producers, and the
wineries and microbreweries that Canadians love.

Finally, we will shift government-supported
research away from biotechnology and energyintensive farming and towards organic and
sustainable food production. We have the
successful twenty-plus year legacy of Environmental
Farm Plan assessments to build upon in which tens
of thousands of family farms voluntarily adopted
more efficient farming practices. 

CYRILLE GIRAUD
LAURIER – SAINTE-MARIE

  .


I

-




JO-AN ROBERTS
VICTORIA

 

STRONG
COMMUNITIES
BECAUSE CANADA
DEPENDS ON IT.

At its heart, Canada is a community of communities,
working together with a shared sense of purpose.
Our nation needs a government that will invest
in the fundamental building blocks on which our
neighbourhoods rely – from healthcare to transit,
child care to public parks, bridges to local agriculture.
All with the aim of increasing the affordability and
livability of the towns and cities we call home. 
The current situation is not working for many
Canadians. The dream of homeownership and
affordable rental housing is slipping away. Canadians
are being asked to pay out-of-pocket for everything
from prescription medicine to dental care, while child
care is becoming increasingly unaffordable. Today,
even two-income households are having trouble
making ends meet month in, month out.

To add insult to injury, consecutive federal
governments have allowed critical infrastructure to
go without needed maintenance. Lack of investment
in the infrastructure that makes our cities productive
and our towns livable is risky behaviour. Crumbling
bridges, aging and insufficient transit, nonexistent rail
infrastructure – these problems are no longer rarities,
they have become the norm. We want to invest in our
communities just as previous generations invested
in the systems we have allowed to fall into disrepair.
A modern 21st century economy is undermined by
deteriorating infrastructure.

BECAUSE CANADA DEPENDS ON IT, OUR TOP PRIORITIES FOR
BUILDING STRONG CANADIAN COMMUNITIES ARE TO:

GREEN PARTY 2015

17

 1

DEFEND CANADA’S PUBLIC HEALTH CARE
Defend single-payer universal health care. Bring all parties back to the table for a renewal of
the Health Accord. Innovate in health care through electronic health records, patient-centred team
medicine built around the family physician working with nurse-practitioners, pharmacists, midwives,
naturopaths and others.
Expand health care to cover prescription medication
for all Canadians and public dental coverage for lowincome youth (under 18 years of age), and increase
the emphasis on preventative health care.
Every developed country in the world with a universal
health care system provides prescription drug
coverage, except Canada. Truly universal health
care means guaranteeing that all Canadians have
access to the medication they need, and the Green
Party will fight to expand public health care to cover
prescription medication. 
We will implement a National Pharmacare Plan that,
through the advantage of bulk buying, will actually
save Canadians $11 billion each year. It will especially
benefit senior citizens, who spend the most on
prescription medication, and it will allow physicians
and doctors to better track if patients are at risk of
dangerous over-medication. We will be far more
rigorous in assessing new drug applications. We will
apply the gold standard for pharmaceutical review to
ensure we reject drugs shown to hurt more people
than they heal. At the same time, our Pharmacare Plan
will provide much needed coverage to the millions of
Canadians who are forced to pay out-of-pocket for
prescription medication every year. 
 

It is appalling that in a country as wealthy as Canada,
our children do not have guaranteed no-cost access
to high quality dental care. In order to address the
crisis among the most marginal in our society, we will
expand our public health care coverage to include
dental coverage for low-income Canadians under the
age of eighteen. 
Canadians know that the best way we can reduce
the burden on our health care system is to work to
ensure we don’t get sick in the first place. Despite
this, our medical system focuses disproportionately
on cure and not enough on prevention. We will work
with the provinces to develop preventative health
care guidelines that incentivize active lifestyles and
healthy diets, saving our system millions by keeping
Canadians healthy from childhood onwards. 
As a first order of business after the election, we will
ensure the National Conference on Lyme Disease,
required by law in the Green Party’s first bill, will
develop a national strategy to confront this growing
threat. It is scheduled for November to be chaired by
the federal Minister of Health.
As part of the big picture project of creating healthy
communities, we will adopt stricter regulations to
prohibit cancer-causing chemicals in our food and
consumer products.

The Green Party supports expansion of CPP as the most
reliable and predictable pension plan.

18

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

 2

IMPLEMENT A NATIONAL SENIORS STRATEGY
The Conservative approach to public policy is a series of unrelated, gimmicky, vote-buying schemes.
Canada’s seniors deserve better. We will work through the Council of Canadian Governments to develop
a National Seniors Strategy with the following elements:
• 

A Housing plan, with affordable, predictable
home care support;

• 

Access to the equity in homes to support
day-to-day living expenses;

• 

A Guaranteed Livable Income to ensure
no Canadian lives in poverty;

• 

Addressing the Supreme Court of Canada
decision to allow physician-assisted death.

• 

Pharmacare – strongly benefits seniors;

• 

A National Dementia Strategy, including more
long-term care beds in neighbourhood facilities;

• 

An approach that supports “aging in place”;

• 

Pension protection, expansion of CPP;

• 

Promotion of intergenerational programs that
allow our kids – from toddlers to high school
students – to visit seniors and develop relationships
that have proven benefits to both generations;

• 

Convenient and safe public transport to support
independent living;

The most extreme challenges of aging are
experienced by seniors living in poverty, a
disproportionate proportion of whom are women.
While the percentage of seniors living in poverty
dropped dramatically from a high of approximately
30 percent in 1976, to a low of 4.7 percent in 2007,
the poverty rates for seniors have begun to move
up once again – 5.8 percent in 2008. We cannot be
complacent about the economic struggles of seniors.
The Green Party supports expansion of CPP as the
most reliable and predictable pension plan.

FRANCES LITMAN
ESQUIMALT – SAANICH – SOOKE

 3

ELIMINATE POVERTY AND CHALLENGE INEQUALITY
Implementing a Guaranteed Livable Income, ensuring equal pay for equal work, and ensuring
high quality child care for every Canadian family who wants it, while providing a school nutrition
program – providing healthy food to kids in school to help them learn better.
Despite the growing number of two-income
households, Canadian families are finding it harder
and harder to make ends meet. Green Party programs
and policies will reduce income inequality, and ensure
all Canadians have the opportunity to prosper.
We will phase-in a national Guaranteed Livable
Income, to ensure that no person’s income falls
below what is necessary for health, life and dignity.
Through the Council of Canadian Governments we
will work with the other levels of government whose
inadequate poverty band-aid solutions (such as
welfare, disability programs) can be rolled up in order
to fund Guaranteed Livable Income.
Providing our most at-risk citizens with the resources
they need to make ends meet greatly reduces the
burden on our emergency and social services, our
health care and criminal justice systems – saving
Canadian society money and empowering all citizens
to overcome periods of hardship. As an immediate
first step, the Green Party would implement a federal
minimum wage of $15 an hour. By providing a cheque
to every Canadian over 18, the carbon fee and
dividend system will also assist in providing help to
those who need it most.
We will implement a National Housing Strategy
based on Housing First principles. Housing First is a
proven, recovery-oriented approach that centres on
quickly moving people experiencing homelessness
into independent, permanent housing, and then
providing additional supports and services as
needed. This strategy will guarantee dignity and
support for Canadians at the margins of our society,
and will help address homelessness while at the
same time reducing the burden on our emergency
and health services.

20

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

Our Housing Strategy will address the continuum of
needs – from social housing for those in poverty or
dealing with mental health and addiction problems,
to First Nations, Metis, and Inuit housing crises,
to the market failures depriving those with even a
decent income of access to the affordable housing
they need. We can ensure that all housing needs
are met – whether seniors, youth, or the stressed
middle class.
It is a black mark against Canada that, in 2015,
Canadian women earn, on average, $8,000 less
per year than their male counterparts for doing
the same jobs. We will fight to end gender-based
discrimination in the workplace and in Canadian
society at large, and ensure that Canada eliminates
the gender wage gap once and for all.
Although we must continue to work to address
deeply-rooted gender bias in Canadian society,
it will take time. One important step is ensuring
high-quality affordable child care. We will work
with the provinces, territories and Indigenous
communities to establish accessible, convenient,
enriched and affordable child care spaces for any
Canadian family that seeks it. We will support
women to re-enter the workforce whenever they
choose after having children. The Green Party
believes that workplace childcare has many
advantages – enhanced parenting time and access
to children through the work day, extension of
breast-feeding opportunities, improved employee
productivity, and improving the convenience of
public transport when parents and kids share their
morning destination. Tax breaks to employers
for the creation of child care spaces is one tool
among many we will use to ensure that families
have the spaces they need.

 4

BUILD STRONG FIRST NATIONS AND INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES
We need to move to implement the findings of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The path
to justice, healing and reconciliation begins with
accepting a painful truth: the horrors of the residential
school system constituted a policy of cultural
genocide. There is no way to undo the damage
nor to compensate for the grief and loss of many
generations of children and families. The truth is hard
to absorb, but absorb it we must.

Creating opportunity for indigenous communities
and their people means ensuring access to quality
public services for all First Nations, Metis and Inuit.
It requires adequate funding for housing, education,
and health care, both on and off reserves. We will
work to expand rural health care infrastructure by
investing in telehealth and mobile medical units,
to ensure indigenous communities have access to
critical care.

True reconciliation will take time, and while we work
to build a new, nation-to-nation partnership based on
mutual respect and understanding, there are urgent
and important steps that must be taken by the federal
government to put the relationship on firmer footing.

The ongoing crisis of missing and murdered
indigenous women must be urgently addressed. We
will launch a national inquiry and fight to ensure that
structural violence against indigenous communities
is addressed. 

We begin by recognizing indigenous rights and title,
and will negotiate in good faith to settle land claims,
establish treaties and self-government arrangements,
and move to repeal the Indian Act should that be the
consensus of First Nations. We will respect the rights
of First Nations to take leadership of development
projects on their traditional territories.

We also recognize the critical importance of
defending languages and cultures, and will provide
new federal funding for culturally appropriate
education in traditional languages.

BRENDA SAYERS
NORTH ISLAND – POWELL RIVER

 5

REVERSE CBC-RADIO CANADA FUNDING CUTS
Investing an additional $285-million in the first year of our new Green Parliament and
$315 million in every subsequent year to protect our national broadcaster.
We will ensure Radio Canada and CBC have
adequate and stable funding, reversing the Harper
Conservatives’ $117-million cut, and investing an
additional $168-million and $315 million every year
thereafter to rebuild the CBC and Radio-Canada’s
local coverage and capacity. We will also restructure
the governance structure of the public broadcaster
to end the political influence of partisan cronies
being appointed to the board.
We need to re-invest in a CBC/Radio-Canada that
is distinctly public and distinctly Canadian, ensuring
our public broadcaster has the resources and
expertise to provide quality local news coverage
from our biggest communities to our smallest.
The CBC and Radio Canada define what it means
to be Canadian by covering the unique, the
unconventional, and the truly Canadian. We’ll make
sure it has adequate and sustainable funding so it
can continue to enrich our lives for years to come.

JOSÉ NÚÑEZ-MELO, VIMY
BRUCE HYER, THUNDER BAY – SUPERIOR NORTH

In addition, we will increase funding to all of Canada’s
arts and culture organizations including the Canada
Council for the Arts and Telefilm Canada.
In addition to restoring funding to CBC and
Radio-Canada, we will work to rebuild the arm’s
length governance of our arts and cultural
institutions to prevent political interference, prevent
further monopolization of Canadian media, and
defend the freedom and integrity of the internet
by enshrining the principle of “net-neutrality” in
Canadian legislation.
We must be very concerned about the threat of the
Trans-Pacific Partnership and its Crown Corporation
provisions. If adopted, it could undermine our
ability to maintain many public services provided
through Crown corporations, including to our
cultural industries.

 6

PROTECTING CANADA POST
Daily mail service to everyone’s front door.
Canadians in the 21st century deserve postal
service to their doors. Canada Post is experiencing
a decline in letter service, but an increase in parcel
delivery. The impact of the internet cuts both
ways: more emails reduce letters by post; on-line
shopping has increased parcels. Small business is
very dependent on postal service. We cannot afford
to lose a strong Canada Post.
Fortunately, Canada Post is still profitable. It can be
sustainable and profitable into the future. CUPW
has long advocated a diversification of services.
This is particularly valuable as Canada Post is in

7

every community – big and small. As commercial
banks have withdrawn their physical presence in
many communities, Canada Post can offer much
needed services. Other countries have allowed their
postal services to sell insurance, provide banking
services and other services to remote communities.
Perhaps the best model is Israel where postal
service has been diversified with over 70 different
products and services.
We will reverse recent decisions to reduce home
delivery and we will set Canada Post on a profitable
course for its future.

KEEP OUR COMMUNITIES SAFE
Creating peace of mind for Canadians by reversing funding cuts and re-investing
in disaster preparedness, training, and equipment for our forces on the frontlines
of keeping our communities safe.
We must make sure that the Canadians tasked with
keeping us safe are fully-resourced, well-trained, and
equipped to fulfill their mission – from the Canadian
Forces to civilian forces like the Coast Guard, Park
Rangers, Fisheries Patrol, Canadian Space Agency,
and Northern Rangers. We will re-open the shuttered
Coast Guard stations on our coastlines.
Keeping our communities safe means strengthening
Canada’s defence capacity by prioritizing roles and
missions for our forces that focus on peacekeeping;
defensive missions with our allies; border, northern,
and coast guard patrols; search and rescue missions;
and patrolling our parks.
Recognizing the critical role that our forces play
also means respecting and truly taking care of our
veterans. Canadian veterans deserve our grateful
and ongoing support, including secure and generous
pensions. Our veterans should never be forced to
fight in the courts to secure their long-term benefits
or to ensure that Veterans Affairs disability pension
promises are honoured.

We will re-open the Veterans Affairs offices across
Canada, reversing the $200 million cut to Veterans
Affairs. Our veterans deserve more than to be left
on hold with a government 1-800 number that is
never answered, instead of the help they need
from a compassionate person who knows their
situation. We will ensure access to service dogs
trained to assist veterans suffering from PostTraumatic Stress Disorder.
Perhaps most importantly, keeping our communities
safe means building Canada’s disaster preparedness
capacity. We will invest in comprehensive earthquake,
forest fire, flooding and tsunami response plans to
bring Canadian disaster readiness up to world-class
standards, so we can more ably respond to the
extreme weather events that are becoming more
common as the climate changes.

GREEN PARTY 2015

23

  w>w_Zm>C


 

GOOD
GOVERNMENT
BECAUSE IT’S TIME TO
RESTORE DEMOCRACY. 

Good government is founded on prudent planning
and rational, evidence-based decision-making in the
public interest. Good government provides long-term
stability, security from threats both domestic and
abroad, and a vision that stretches well beyond fouryear election cycles.
To deliver on these basic principles, government needs
to engage with, and be responsive to, the concerns of
Canadian citizens. The critical first step in this process
is to ensure we have a government that represents the
will of the people – that means an end to first-past-thepost voting, an end to false majorities, and the creation
of a voting system that ensures all Canadians have a
voice in our government.

The Green Party is the only party committed to
ending whipped votes. MPs from the other parties
in Parliament routinely face whipped votes – they
must vote the party line or face punishments, such
as not being allowed to speak in the House or even
being thrown out of the party. No Green MP will ever
face a whipped vote. They will be free to put their
conscience and their constituents first.
That is the commitment Green candidates make,
to be your voice in Ottawa, your local champions.

BECAUSE IT’S TIME TO RESTORE DEMOCRACY,
OUR TOP PRIORITIES ARE TO:

GREEN PARTY 2015

25

 1

ELECT MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT WHO ARE HONEST, ETHICAL,
HARD-WORKING REPRESENTATIVES FOR THEIR CONSTITUENTS
AND CHAMPIONS FOR THEIR COMMUNITIES
When you look at the Green candidates across Canada
you will not find a single “career politician.” You will
find people with impressive resumes – whether in
science, law, academia, teaching, public policy, small
business, the arts, journalism, First Nations leadership,
municipal government, community organizing and
volunteerism, and medicine.
The health of our democracy depends on electing
Members of Parliament who are accountable to their
constituents. Following Elizabeth May’s example,
Green Members of Parliament will work tirelessly
on behalf of their communities and never abuse
the public trust placed in them. 

2

Green MPs will conduct themselves with integrity and
civility, treat others with respect, and never heckle in the
House of Commons. Green MPs will always keep the
interests of Canada paramount and never be told to vote
against the interests and well-being of their constituents.
Green MPs will seek constructive solutions to issues
in their local communities, striving to create dialogue
and solve problems when they arise. 
Green MPs will publish their expenses online, to
ensure maximum transparency and accountability,
and never use Parliamentary resources for party or
personal benefit.  

RESTORE CANADIAN PUBLIC SCIENCE AND THE ROLE OF EVIDENCE
IN OUR DECISION MAKING
Good policy and keeping government accountable depends on good information.
Under Stephen Harper, Canada moved from evidencebased policy making to policy-based evidence-making.
Funding for basic research and scientists in Canada is at an
all-time low; research at small universities is disappearing
and we are rapidly losing our capacity for long-term
innovation. As a result of the Harper Conservatives’ decision
to eliminate the long-form census, Canadian researchers,
tracking everything from poverty to public health, know less
and less about our country as time progresses.
Science, evidence, and transparency together form
the backbone of informed decision-making. We will
immediately restore the long-form census to ensure
that Canadian researchers and policy-makers have
access to the latest data. 
Canadian scientists, both inside and outside of
government, must have the freedom to pursue important
discoveries, without looking over their shoulders and
worrying about whether their work is “industry relevant”
or subject to political interference in funding decisions.
We will fight to ensure Canada remains a world
leader in discovery science by enacting Public Access
to Science legislation to ensure our scientists are

26

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

unmuzzled and free to discuss their findings with the
media and the Canadian public without censorship
or political interference. Our open science legislation
would also ensure that all government-funded scientific
research is publicly accessible by law.
We will begin to rebuild the public scientific capacity lost
during the past decade by providing $75-million annually
to add critical science capacity to Environment Canada,
Health Canada, Parks Canada, and Fisheries and Oceans.
We will implement new legislation to ensure that any
new laws or regulations are based on sound evidence
that is transparent, rigorous, ethically produced, easy
to access and understand, based on the best available
information and free from political manipulation.
Elizabeth May’s bill (which died on the order paper due
to the August 2 writ) will be re-entered to mandate that
all publicly-funded science must be published.
We are committed to restoring the role of Canadian
science as part of our wider vision of bringing back
evidence-based planning and decision-making around
climate change, criminal justice, drug policy, harm
reduction, homelessness, and more.

  

KEN MELAMED
WEST VANCOUVER SUNSHINE COAST SEA TO SKY COUNTRY

3

CREATE A COUNCIL OF CANADIAN GOVERNMENTS TO FIND SOLUTIONS
WITHIN CANADA, AND WORK COLLABORATIVELY WITH OUR ALLIES ABROAD
Canada’s success has always depended on people
working together. We are a country of vast geography
and distinct regions. Good and effective government
in Canada depends on bringing people together with
a shared sense of purpose. In an era of global
insecurity, it is more important than ever that we work
together here at home. 
In the 21st century, we need to reinvent the way we
work as a federation. We need to work together to
develop national goals and national strategies. To this
end, we will create a Council of Canadian Governments to address shared challenges and ensure more
effective collaboration between the various levels of
government in Canada – federal, provincial/territorial,
municipal/local, and First Nations, Metis and Inuit. 
Chaired by the federal government, the Council will
regularly bring together the provinces and territories,
municipal governments, and Indigenous leadership to
ensure constructive collaboration to find real solutions
for the problems that concern all Canadians from
security to infrastructure to health care. In order to make
progress on these critical issues, it is important that all
levels of government are pulling in the same direction.
With a transparent process, a published agenda and a
clear path to set in place national strategies – on energy,
transportation, culture, health care, and climate.
It is simply absurd that Canada has more internal
domestic barriers to trade and movement of workers
than the European Union has among 28 separate and
sovereign nation states. Canadian workers should be
free to move anywhere in the country, without worrying
about whether their certifications are recognized
in one place or another. The Council of Canadian
Governments will be the catalyst for a new era of
cooperation that establishes common standards to
improve interprovincial labour mobility and work
towards recognition for international accreditations.
The bottom line is this – when our federal, provincial,
municipal and First Nations governments work
together, we can bring down barriers that restrict our
employment opportunities and keep families apart. 
From climate change to terrorism, we will work together
with our allies to counter threats and ensure a safer
world. We will strengthen our international influence

28

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

by investing in our diplomatic skills and talent, and
shift our focus and funding away from NATO military
contributions, towards United Nations peacekeeping,
poverty alleviation and disaster relief efforts. We will
commit to ending poverty globally by contributing 0.7%
of GDP to official development assistance. We will not
purchase the F-35 stealth fighter jets. We will invest
in new military equipment that fits Canada’s defence
requirements. We will purchase fixed-wing search and
rescue planes, ice-breakers and replace dangerous old
military hardware to ensure that threats to our military
are not posed by the equipment we give them.
We will overhaul our immigration and refugee
protection system to ensure that Canada is seen as
a welcoming and compassionate home for people
fleeing violence and persecution. Our immigration
system should welcome and integrate new Canadians
over the long term. The short-term employment
focus of the Temporary Foreign Workers Programs
both exploits those workers, often denied a route to
Canadian citizenship, while denying Canadians those
job opportunities.
We will reverse numerous changes to our laws that have
created two-tiers of Canadian citizenship – with some
deemed more Canadian than others. The matter of
citizenship should never be political. It must be based
on facts. You are born here or you are naturalized a
Canadian citizen. Canadian citizens who violate the law
go to jail. But to create the notion that citizenship can
be revoked for anything other than fraud in obtaining
that citizenship is to move into a shifting and uncertain
understanding of what it is to be Canadian.
We will act to resolve the confusion created for
the “lost Canadians” – one million Canadians
have effectively been denied recognition of their
citizenship – including thousands of our war dead.
We will repeal as unconstitutional the Foreign
Accounts Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). It essentially
deprives any Canadian with US connections (even
those short of dual citizenship) of full rights to privacy
and treats them as a lesser Canadian. We will also
repeal Bill C-24 which allows the minister of citizenship
to revoke citizenship. Other threats to Canadians will
be eliminated with the repeal of Bill C-51.

 4

REPEAL BILL C-51 TO DEFEND CANADIANS’ CHARTER RIGHTS AND PRIVACY
Presented as an “anti-terror” bill by the Harper
Conservatives, Bill C-51 needlessly expands the
powers of Canada’s spy agencies, without creating
the necessary oversight. At the same time, it actually
undermines our policing efforts to abort terrorist
plots. It is a dangerous piece of legislation that does
not make us safer.

Bill C-51 allows widespread government surveillance
and intrusions into Canadians’ privacy, will not
make Canadians safer, and, in fact, will make us less
safe. Without any oversight or obligation to share
information with RCMP, CSIS is allowed to secretly
intervene in suspicious activity without coordinating
with other security forces. This is a recipe for disaster.

We were the first party to oppose Bill C-51 in the
House of Commons, and we will continue to fight to
repeal this Bill and defend Canadians’ constitutionally
guaranteed rights and freedoms.  

We now know that the Communications Security
Establishment Canada (CSEC) already collects millions
of Internet communications every day from average
Canadians. Canada Border Services also has no review
or oversight mechanism. And none of these agencies,
all tasked in one way of another with confronting
terrorism, have any oversight individually and no
requirement to share information with each other. This
is unacceptable. At a time when the United States
is beginning to rebalance the relationship between
government surveillance and the privacy of its citizens,
the information sharing provisions in Bill C-51 will
decisively tip the scales toward unchecked government
intervention into our personal lives.  

Among the thousands of ordinary Canadians of all
political stripes who spoke out in opposition to Bill C-51,
four former Prime Ministers, five former Justices
of the Supreme Court, and over 100 independent
legal scholars expressed profound concern with this
ineffective, harmful, and overreaching new law.
Canada already has effective anti-terror laws that
do not trample on our rights as egregiously as
Bill C-51 does. The RCMP has used these existing
powers to keep Canadians safe; for this they deserve
Canadians’ gratitude.  

Bill C-51 must be repealed, as it infringes on the
political and civil rights granted to all of us under
the Canadian Charter. For these reasons, Green
MPs will make the repeal of Bill C-51 a top priority
in Parliament. 

GORD MILLER
GUELPH

 5

REPLACE THE FIRST-PAST-THE-POST SYSTEM WITH PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION
Our current voting system is outdated.
It is the only voting system that allows a minority
of the votes to elect a majority government with
100 percent of the power. It makes voters feel as if
their vote just doesn’t count. It is time to replace it.
The first-past-the-post voting system has lost the
confidence of Canadians. Our promise is to replace the
first-past-the-post system with a form of proportional
representation within the first year of the next
Parliament. We will determine the form of proportional
representation best suited to Canada through extensive
public consultation by an all-party committee.
We will overhaul the “Fair” Elections Act, establishing
mechanisms that increase voter participation,
and ensure greater fairness, transparency, and
accountability in election financing. We will make the
Commissioner of Canada Elections (CCE) responsible
for investigations into campaign irregularities,

LYNNE QUARMBY
BURNABY NORTH – SEYMOUR

reporting directly to Parliament, and give him or her
the power to fully investigate and hold to account
anyone who breaks Canada’s electoral laws. The
Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) should be clearly
mandated to encourage voter turnout. Both the CCE
and CEO should be appointed by an impartial Public
Appointments Commission.
To strengthen local democracy and enhance the
freedom of MPs to stand up for the interests of their
constituents, we will amend the Elections Act to
remove the requirement that party leaders need to
sign the nomination papers of candidates, giving this
power instead to the local organizations. In opening
up the Elections Act, we will un-do damaging
changes made in the Harper era that undermine
Canadians’ right and ability to vote, whether living
within Canada (youth, First Nations, homeless and
others) or living overseas.

 6

DEFEND CANADA’S SOVEREIGNTY
Of all the damaging things done to Canada in
the last nine years, ratifying the Canada-China
Investment Treaty – in secret, by Cabinet alone,
without any parliamentary or public hearings – poses
the greatest long-term threat to our sovereignty.
The treaty, known as a Foreign Investment
Promotion and Protection Agreement or FIPA,
is lop-sided, benefiting the Peoples’ Republic of
China, while providing no advantage to Canada.
In fact, it locks us in until the year 2045, giving
State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) of the People’s
Republic of China (PRC) superior rights to those of
Canadian companies. Beijing’s SOEs now have the
right to bring arbitration claims against Canada in
secret tribunals. These are not courts, but private
arbitrations in which arbitrators gain personally and
financially through a system that lacks the fairness
and predictability of our national courts. Thanks
to Stephen Harper, our sovereignty has been
significantly eroded.
In the next parliament, Green MPs will press for
legislation to require that any and all complaints
from Beijing under this treaty, even early diplomatic
complaints, must be made public. We must ensure

7

that all the other party leaders understand that
Canadians want to fight for our laws and push back
against complaints from SOEs from the People’s
Republic of China.
If Beijing complains about a municipal by-law or
proposed legislative change, such as reversing
the damage to the Fisheries Act, Environmental
Assessment or Navigable Waters Protection
Act, we will not cave. We will not let FIPA-chill
cause government to pull back from doing the
right thing. We need a transparent commitment
to aggressively defend Canada’s policies and
decisions, and, if we must, to write a cheque for
damages under FIPA, rather than cancel planned
laws or repeal existing ones.
We will vigorously oppose the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP) and the Comprehensive Economic
Trade Agreement (CETA).
Greens will also work with Green MPs in
governments around the world to open a full-scale
global review of all investor-state agreements with
the goal of revising and improving all of them to
rebalance rights to democracies and reduce global
corporate rule.

REVERSE HARPER’S LEGACY TO PUT OUR GOVERNMENT BACK ON TRACK
Over the last decade there have been unprecedented
changes to the way our government operates. Our
government now functions in the least transparent,
least accountable, most partisan and divisive manner
in Canadian history.
The Harper Conservatives’ invented the use of
omnibus budget bills – bills that cover dozens of
diverse and unrelated changes to law and policy. Such
bills have been rammed through Parliament time and
time again since 2011, without proper study. With the
“might makes right” style of Stephen Harper, over
99 percent of opposition party amendments were
routinely rejected.

Omnibus budget bills have severely damaged our
democracy. The Harper administration has used
omnibus bills to devastate centuries-old environmental
legislation, curb free speech, and cut billions in
funding from health care. A single omnibus bill in
spring 2012 (C-38) changed 70 laws, which even former
Conservative ministers said undermined our fisheries
and environment.
The Green Party will work to end the illegitimate
use of omnibus bills. These sweeping bills have no
place in our democracy. In addition to ending the
use of omnibus bills, Green MPs will restore all the
environmental protections that the Harper government
has eliminated over the past ten years.

GREEN PARTY 2015

31

 Due to Stephen Harper’s shocking use of prorogation
to avoid political embarrassment and confidence
votes he knew he would lose, Canada now needs to
control access to prorogation by requiring a 2/3 vote
in Parliament. We need new rules to require the
summoning of a new parliament (within 30 days of an
election) and for the dissolution of Parliament.
We will work to end the “American-style”
attack politics that is slowly becoming the norm
in Canada, slashing the budget of the Prime
Minister’s Office (PMO) by 50 percent. The PMO
is a taxpayer-funded office that has become a
partisan central agency, controlling all government
MPs, Cabinet ministers, all operations, and even
attempting to force non-partisan civil servants into
partisan schemes.
The PMO now constitutes a daily contempt
of Parliament. It spews out negative, partisan,
and divisive campaigns. The PMO has exerted
control over parliamentary legislative committees,
demanding Conservative MPs attack witnesses who
disagree with Conservative policy and whipping
votes in committee. The PMO has (in violation of
our Constitution) also dictated votes in the Senate
and even attempted to interfere in an audit of
Senate expenses.
We will slash the advertising budget of the federal
government. All contracts must be publicly tendered
on a website with decisions being removed from
political operatives.
We must empower parliamentary committees to
fully discharge their oversight responsibilities:
appoint committee members for a full session of
Parliament; select chairs through secret ballots
and ensure adequate budgets; strengthen the
mandates and establish genuine independence

for officers of parliament (Parliamentary Budget
Officer, Privacy and Information Commissioners,
Auditor General, Commissioner for the
Environment and Sustainable Development,
Science Advisor, National Security Advisor).
We will overhaul Accountability, Conflict of Interest,
Privacy and Access to Information legislation.
It is time to curtail patronage through use of an
independent Public Appointments Commission.
We need to act to diversify and enliven the media
in Canada. A robust news media is essential for an
informed citizenry and a healthy democracy. Canada’s
media has become dangerously concentrated in a
few hands. Recommendations have been made in
numerous reports and Royal Commissions. It is time
to act on these recommendations and apply anti-trust
legislation to corporate media, while restoring our
public broadcaster and its essential role.
We will enshrine in the Constitution the right
to a healthy environment. We will act to reform the
Senate. A comprehensive proposal for an elected
Senate by proportional representation must be
developed and approved by Canadians in a national
referendum. It is time to grasp the nettle and amend
the constitutional amending formula to approve
changes through a referendum mechanism.
The PMO is not part of our system of government.
It is not even mentioned in the Constitution. It was
invented in 1970. While initially exerting a minor
level of control it has become too powerful, too
centralized, and too unaccountable – its budget
needs to be cut and practices reformed.
We must protect the fundamental principle that the
prime minister reports to parliament; not the other
way around.

We must protect the fundamental principle that the prime
minister reports to parliament; not the other way around.

32

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

  

 

wk <<Om_Am. dOOdemx.

BOLD CLIMATE
ACTION
BECAUSE WE LIVE HERE.

Climate change is both the biggest challenge
and the biggest opportunity that Canada has
ever faced. While the consequences of failing to
address climate change would be catastrophic,
our transition to a green, sustainable economy will
create good local jobs, shorter commutes, more
livable cities, and cleaner air and water.
Our plan is to move to the virtual elimination
of fossil fuel use in Canada by mid-century. Our
short-term target is 40 percent below 2005 levels
by 2025, while we are calling for 80 percent
reductions below 1990 levels by 2050. These are
ambitious targets, yet the scale and urgency
of this challenge demands nothing less. As
Canadians, we will rise to this challenge and,

in doing so, create a strong, stable, and
prosperous economy today and for our children
and grandchildren tomorrow.
For Canadians to benefit from this transition, we
need to elect Green Members of Parliament. Only
Green MPs will stand up to defend our coastlines
from increased tanker traffic, our rivers and parks
from reckless pipeline projects, and our economy
from further pursuit of high-risk extractive schemes
that threaten Canada’s long-term prosperity. Only
Green MPs will position our economy to reap the full
benefits of the inevitable global shift to a fossil-fuel
free economy.
It is time for Canada to take bold climate action.

BECAUSE WE LIVE HERE,
OUR TOP ENVIRONMENTAL PRIORITIES ARE TO:

GREEN PARTY 2015

35

 1

DEFEND OUR COASTAL WATERS FROM RISKY PIPELINES AND OIL TANKERS
Only Green MPs will put our coastal communities first by standing against all new raw
bitumen export schemes.
Kinder Morgan proposes a seven-fold increase in oil
sands tanker traffic through Vancouver and Burnaby,
while Energy East proposes to increase tanker traffic
through the Bay of Fundy. These tankers would carry
bitumen from the oil sands, mixed with toxic diluents
to make it flow, a mixture that is impossible to clean
up if spilled.
A single tanker accident would ruin our coast and
the lives and livelihoods that depend on its health.
That is why we recognize that the economic, social
and environmental consequences of approving these
projects is simply too high. We will take a stand and
defend our coastline.

Poll after poll shows that the people of the
West Coast will not allow this risky project. More
than half of British Columbians say they oppose
the Kinder Morgan expansion, including more than
three-quarters of young British Columbians. Even
the Ontario Energy Board has ruled that Energy East
poses more risks than benefits. While the old parties
use complaints about process to avoid taking a
stand, or even fast track and support these projects
outright, the Green Party is the only party standing
up for the people and communities threatened by
these projects.

2

ARREST THE GROWTH IN OIL SANDS EXPANSION
Protecting existing jobs in the industry, creating new jobs by upgrading and refining existing production,
and providing skills training for workers who have been laid off or who want to transition to more stable,
long-term jobs. This strategy (more Peter Lougheed and less Ralph Klein) would actually help Alberta’s
economy avoid the disruptive boom and bust cycle.
Given climate realities and volatile international oil
prices, expanding oil sands production is simply not
on. Most of the bitumen in the Alberta oil sands must
remain in the ground. We will create new jobs in
Canada’s oil and gas sector by refining the product
we already produce, rather than shipping it out raw
for refining in other countries.
In addition to increasing our refining capacity,
Canada should be home to leading the global clean
technology industry – an industry that has boomed
in other countries like Germany, where over
1.4 million clean-tech jobs generate over 11 percent
of the country’s GDP.

36

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

We need to respect the oil sands workers whose
livelihoods still depend on the industry, and to
support the tens of thousands of oil sands workers
who have recently been laid off. Canada should
provide these workers with retraining to ensure they
find good, long-term reliable jobs close to home,
not jobs that are vulnerable to cycles of boom and
bust and often thousands of kilometres away from
their families.
We must also provide urgent support to
First Nations living downstream from the oil sands,
whose communities and traditional foods are
being contaminated by oil sands pollution in the
Athabasca water and air sheds, with devastating
health consequences.

 JO-AN ROBERTS
VICTORIA

 

38 BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

 

3

IMPLEMENT A ROBUST CANADIAN CLIMATE AND ENERGY STRATEGY
Partnering with the provinces to price carbon, implement a Canadian Fee and Dividend Plan,
rapidly phase out coal-fired electricity, and transition to a prosperous, decarbonized economy.
Climate and energy are two sides of the same coin.
We urgently need a comprehensive, science-based
national climate strategy to address rising sea levels,
drought, extreme weather events, changing rainfall
patterns, increased forest fires, melting permafrost
and crumbling Arctic infrastructure. 
A robust Canadian Climate and Energy Strategy
begins with eliminating all fossil fuel subsidies.
Canada currently provides more than $1 billion dollars
a year in subsidies to the fossil fuel industry, meaning,
on a per capita basis, Canadian taxpayers provide
more handouts to the fossil fuel industry than almost
every other country in the G20.  
Next, we must work together to put a national price
on carbon. In the complete absence of federal
leadership, the provinces have taken up the challenge
of climate change on their own. Although some
progress has been made, notably in British Columbia,
Ontario, and Quebec, this patchwork of climate
strategies is an inefficient way to tackle an issue that
faces all Canadians.

The Carbon Fee and Dividend Plan is the smartest,
most efficient, and most effective way to shift away
from burning fossil fuels. We will place a fee on
carbon, and pay the funds it generates directly to
every Canadian over age 18 in the form of an annual
carbon dividend. This plan will defend our climate,
diversify our energy mix, grow our economy, and
ensure energy security for Canadians. 
Most economists and climate scientists agree
that fee and dividend provides an efficient and
comprehensive solution to a complicated problem.
British Columbia has had a carbon pricing plan in
place since 2008, during which time BC’s fuel use has
dropped 16 percent, while GDP has outperformed
the rest of Canada. It incentivizes investment in
sustainable jobs and green technology, discourages
waste and pollution, and puts money directly back
into the pockets of average Canadians.
We need to invest in an infrastructure that promotes
renewable energy, and a more robust east-west
electricity grid to promote renewable energy
transmission between provinces, while reducing the
enormous waste in our energy systems. We still waste
more than half the energy we use. It’s time to save
money and reduce pollution by going after waste.

4

CREATE A NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION STRATEGY WITH STRICT
NEW RULES ON RAIL SAFETY
Strict new rail safety laws and new investment for Canada’s rail system – Restore Canadian railways
with new funding and stronger rules to ensure efficient rail travel and safe movement of hazardous
industrial goods including oil and gas.
Canada’s national rail systems are in decline. In much
of Canada, rail routes that once moved thousands
of people are abandoned. Edmonton to Calgary,
Saskatoon to Regina, Halifax to Sydney have all been
axed, despite their profitability.

Green MPs will re-invest in our national rail systems,
building more train cars in Canada, increasing train
speeds, phasing in high-speed rail where feasible,
and creating green transportation and energy
infrastructure corridors in key regions. An improved
rail system will make Canada more economically

GREEN PARTY 2015

39

 competitive, create thousands of new jobs, reduce
traffic congestion, and provide a fast, inexpensive and
safe mode of transport in key commuter corridors.

comprehensive plan to limit the burden on our
rail system that has been created by exporting
unprocessed oil by rail.

We will develop a national transportation
strategy – investing in local public transit and
expanding VIA Rail to provide more modern,
efficient, and frequent passenger rail service. We
will invest $600 million in 2016-2017, building to
$764 million by 2020 in VIA Rail.

Further, in order to reduce the risk to our
communities and ensure that a tragedy like Lac
Mégantic can never again occur, we will strengthen
Canada’s rail safety rules and give regulators the tools
they need to protect our neighbourhoods from train
derailments, especially those involving hazardous
materials. We will fund the re-routing of tracks for
freight and rail yards away from populated areas.

Rebalancing the relationship between passenger
trains and freight cargo will begin with a

5

END THERMAL COAL EXPORTS
Work with provinces to ensure the rapid phase-out of coal fired generation plants within Canada.
Like the now-shuttered asbestos industry, it is wrong
for Canada to profit from the export of coal destined
to be burned in foreign power plants to create
pollution and dirty energy abroad, while at the same
time we work to eliminate its use within Canada.

Although solar energy is now cost competitive with
the construction of new coal-fired power plants,
existing coal-fired infrastructure at home and abroad
is keeping the world on an unsustainable path. We
must do our part by curtailing the export of thermal
coal from Canadian ports.  

6

DEMONSTRATE CLIMATE LEADERSHIP AT THE UNITED NATIONS
CLIMATE SUMMIT IN PARIS 
The United Nations 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) will take place in Paris – starting a mere
forty days after our federal election. COP21 represents the last, best and only chance for humanity to
avert an intensified climate crisis and to prevent runaway global warming.
Only by electing Green Members of Parliament
can we ensure Canada can lead in these critical
negotiations. We are committed to serious action
to avert a climate crisis. Our MPs will always work
across party lines, because we understand the only
way to make progress is through cooperation and
mutual respect. 
Canada has played a shameful and destructive role at
climate negotiations during Stephen Harper’s time in
power. It is time to restore Canada’s role as a leader.
With the old parties’ support for new pipelines,

40

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

increased tanker traffic, and expanded oil sands
production, only Green MPs will show the way with
realistic and pragmatic climate leadership. We do not
care who gets the credit for Canada’s return to the
world as a climate leader. We just need to be elected
to make sure it happens.
We will fight to restore Canada’s reputation as a nation
that makes us proud at a pivotal time in human history.
In this election, we will take back our country and be
Canada again.

 A

RICHARD HOSEIN
FLEETWOOD PORT KELLS

 

BUDGET OVERVIEW
ALL TOTALS
IN $MILLIONS

2015-16

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Budgetary Revenues

$294,500

$307,600

$318,600

$332,800

$347,900

Program Expenditures

$263,900

$273,000

$281,300

$292,200

$299,600

$28,700

$30,400

$32,300

$33,800

$35,200

$1,900

$4,200

$5,000

$6,800

$13,100

$4,472

$4,556

$4,642

$4,728

$4,815

Revenue Increases

$34,899

$37,885

$37,913

$37,966

$38,040

Spending Increases

$38,895

$42,010

$42,077

$42,498

$42,723

$476

$431

$478

$196

$133

Budgetary Balance (including Green measures)

$2,376

$4,631

$5,478

$6,996

$13,233

Budget balance (status quo)

$1,900

$4,200

$5,000

$6,800

$13,100

Federal Debt (including Green measures)

$613,946

$609,315

$603,837

$596,841

$583,609

Federal Debt (status quo)

$613,900

$609,500

$604,400

$597,600

$584,500

Budgetary Revenues

14.7%

14.9%

15.0%

15.2%

15.5%

Program Expenditures

13.2%

13.2%

13.2%

13.4%

13.3%

Public Debt Charges

1.4%

1.5%

1.5%

1.5%

1.6%

Budgetary Balance

0.1%

0.2%

0.2%

0.3%

0.6%

30.6%

29.5%

28.4%

27.3%

26.0%

$2,003,451

$2,064,561

$2,125,671

$2,186,780

$2,247,890

STATUS QUO

Public Debt Charges
Budgetary Balance (Deficit)

GREEN PARTY INITIATIVES
Personal Tax Changes

Green Party lowers deficit over status quo by

PERCENT OF GDP
(INCLUDING GREEN MEASURES)

Federal Debt (Debt to GDP Ratio)

GDP $M

For full budget details go to greenparty.ca/budget

42

BUILDING A CANADA THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

  

CHRIS TOLLEY
TORONTO DAN FORTH

BUILDING A CANADA
THAT WORKS. TOGETHER.

2015

www.greenparty.ca

1-866-868-3447

AUTHORIZED BY THE GREEN PARTY OF CANADA FUND, CHIEF AGENT FOR THE GREEN PARTY OF CANADA.

BIO GAS
E N E R G Y

Printed on 100% post
consumer recycled paper

 