Building the country
of our dreams

Tom Mulcair?s plan to bring change to Ottawa

 

A message from Tom
This election is about the country we want, the country of our dreams.
Canadians expect their Prime Minister to work hard each and every day to make life better for
their families.
Leadership is about choices.
Our choices are based on our values.
From a young age, my parents taught me and my brothers and sisters the importance of living
by your values.
These values are at the heart of who I am as a husband, a father and grandfather.
As your Prime Minister, I will wake up every day focused on building the country of our dreams.
With the NDP, that means:
  

Bringing in quality, affordable childcare.

  

Strengthening our public health care system.

  

Ensuring a cleaner environment by holding polluters accountable.

  

Kick-starting the economy and creating good jobs.

The NDP will ask profitable corporations to pay their fair share, and invest that money in
childcare, pharmacare and health care.
The NDP will end unfair tax loopholes for CEOs, and invest that money to eliminate poverty.
The NDP will clean up Ottawa, and replace Stephen Harper’s culture of corruption and scandal
with transparency and accountability.
Stephen Harper has done great damage to this country – we only have this chance to
stop him.
Only the NDP is in a position to defeat Stephen Harper and form a more
progressive government in Ottawa.
On October 19th, you can bring change to Ottawa.
I’m ready; let’s get started.
 

 
 

Tom Mulcair
Leader of Canada’s NDP

i
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 After Stephen Harper’s lost decade, we must take immediate
steps to repair the damage he has done to our country.
I pledge to you that a New Democratic Party government will take immediate action to turn
things around for our environment, for health care and for you by delivering leadership at
home and on the world stage.
IN OUR FIRST 100 DAYS AN NDP GOVERNMENT WILL:

Improve your health care
We will immediately inform Canada’s premiers that Harper’s unilateral
health cuts have been cancelled and begin work to develop a new
health accord that will reduce waits for family doctors, create 5,000 new
long-term care beds and lower prescription drug costs by 30%.

Step up to fight climate change
I will personally lead the Canadian delegation to the COP21 climate
conference in Paris with firm targets to cut pollution, and bring in a
home retrofit program to lower your household heating costs.

Create and protect good jobs
We will pass legislation to cut small business taxes to 9% – starting
with one full point on January 1st – and fund priority transit and
infrastructure projects to get people and the economy moving.

Make life more affordable for your family
We will take the first step towards our goal of universal, affordable
childcare by immediately flowing funding for over 60,000 childcare
spaces at no more than $15 a day. We will restore the age of retirement
to 65, and introduce a new Consumer Protection Act to cap ATM fees
and ensure Canadians have access to a low-interest credit card.

Make Ottawa work for you
We will call an inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women,
repeal Bill C-51 and introduce a new Accountability Act that will crack
down on Senate expenses and bolster Conflict of Interest laws.

ii
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 This is my commitment to you.
We will immediately bring change to Ottawa and implement our long-term plan.
You can count on the NDP to:

Invest in better health care, starting with:
  

Helping five million Canadians with 7,000 more doctors, nurses and nurse
practitioners and other health professionals in community clinics.

  

Lowering drug costs through a universal coverage plan.

  

Supporting people as they age by expanding home care to 41,000 more seniors and
providing funding for 5,000 more nursing home beds.

  

Implementing national strategies on aging, and on Alzheimer’s and dementia.

  

Creating a youth mental health innovation fund to reduce wait times and improve
access to care.

  

Tripling the paid leave available for Canadians who are too ill to work.

  

Supporting caregivers by expanding the compassionate care benefit so people can
take up to six months paid leave to care for seriously ill loved ones.

Help your family get ahead and make life more affordable, starting with:
  

Helping working moms and dads with one million quality childcare spaces at no
more than $15 a day.

  

Giving parents an extra five weeks of parental leave.

  

Cracking down on excessive ATM fees and ensuring Canadians can access a lowinterest credit card.

  

Speeding up family reunification, specifically the reunion of children with
their parents.

  

Fast-tracking foreign credential recognition for immigrants.

  

Increasing student grants and eliminating interest on student loans.

  

Creating 40,000 jobs, co-op placements and internships for youth.

  

Reinstating the federal minimum wage and raising it to $15 an hour.

Kick-start the economy and build needed infrastructure, starting with:
  

Cutting taxes for Canada’s job creators by reducing the small business tax from
11 to 9%.

  

Supporting innovation and investment in companies creating jobs in Canada,
with an early focus on the aerospace, automotive, forestry and mining sectors.

  

Creating jobs and building our economy with $1.5 billion per year in new
infrastructure funding to municipalities to fix roads, bridges and water
treatment systems.

iii
Building the Country of Our Dreams

   

Investing $1.3 billion per year in a national strategy to improve transit and
reduce gridlock.

  

Boosting investment in tourism.

  

Supporting regional economic development.

  

Helping retrofit over 50,000 homes and apartment buildings.

  

Investing in flood mitigation and disaster preparedness.

Guarantee retirement security and provide help where it’s needed most,
starting with:
  

Securing a better retirement for all Canadians by expanding the CPP/QPP.

  

Eliminating CEO stock option loopholes, and reinvesting the money to eliminate
child poverty.

  

Increasing the Guaranteed Income Supplement to help lift 200,000 seniors out of
poverty, and returning the retirement age from 67 to 65.

  

Restoring home mail delivery.

  

Creating an action plan to end violence against women, increasing shelter funding
and launching an inquiry into murdered and missing Indigenous women.

  

Ensuring youth participation in sports with funding to support low-income and
disadvantaged youth.

  

Taking action to close the pay gap between men and women.

  

Fixing the Nutrition North food program, and investing in clean energy to get
Northern communities off diesel.

  

Providing support to train and hire 2,500 more front-line police officers, and
investing in crime prevention and anti-gang programs for youth.

Take leadership to build a better Canada, starting with:
  

Working with the provinces and territories, and recognizing their efforts
already underway, to develop a pan-Canadian cap-and-trade program to stop
climate change.

  

Establishing a true Nation to Nation relationship with Indigenous communities,
and closing the education gap for Indigenous youth.

  

Bolstering food and rail safety regulations and enforcement.

  

Investing $454 million to give our veterans the respect and support they deserve.

  

Restoring Canadians’ rights by repealing Bill C-51.

  

Ensuring everyone’s vote matters by bringing in proportional representation
for elections.

  

Giving the Parliamentary Budget Officer independent authority, and creating a
Parliamentary Science Officer.

iv
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Table of Contents

Health and Seniors’ Care...............................................................1
Renewing Public Health Care in Canada 
Working towards Universal Public Drug Coverage 
Taking a Preventative Approach to Health Care 
Expanding Care for Seniors 

1
2
3
4

Helping Families Get Ahead...........................................................6
Childcare and Family Benefits 
Making Life More Affordable by Protecting Consumers and Small Businesses 
Building a More Inclusive Country 
Ensuring Tax Fairness 

6
8
8
10

Jobs and Infrastructure................................................................14
Kick-Starting the Economy 
Reducing Taxes for Small Business 
Promoting Investment in the Manufacturing Sector and Innovation 
Supporting a Diverse Rural Economy 
Building Affordable and Efficient Housing 
Standing Up for Workers 
Ensuring Fairness in Employment Insurance 
Building Needed Infrastructure 
Transitioning to a Cleaner Future, a Greener Economy 

14
15
15
17
18
18
20
21
22

Opportunities for Young Canadians.............................................25
Delivering Affordable, Accessible Post-Secondary Education 
Creating Jobs, Training and Opportunity for the Future 

25
26

Help Where It’s Needed Most......................................................28
Protecting the Most Vulnerable  
Strengthening Retirement Security 
Defending the Rights of Persons Living with Disabilities 
Restoring Home Delivery of Mail 
Ending Violence Against Women 
Pay Equity 
Equal Rights and Opportunities 
Respecting Northerners 
Ensuring Low-Income Youth Can Participate in Sports 

28
29
30
31
32
32
33
34
34

Supporting Indigenous Communities...........................................36
Establishing a Nation to Nation Relationship 
Closing the Education Gap 
Strengthening Indigenous Communities 

36
37
37

Safe and Secure Canada.............................................................40
Making Our Communities Safer 
Clear Regulations, Clear Accountability 
Fighting Terrorism While Protecting Personal Liberties 

40
41
42

 Canadian Forces in the 21st Century 
Treating Our Veterans with Respect 
Restoring Canada’s Place in the World 

43
45
46

Stronger Communities,
Stronger Democracy...................................................................49
Undoing Stephen Harper’s Environmental Damage 
Parks and Water 
Investing in the Arts 
Moving Forward on Women’s Equality 
Closing the Digital Divide 
Leading a Transparent Government 
Ensuring Every Vote Counts 
Putting Evidence First 
Strengthening Partnership Among Governments 
Respecting Our Official Languages 

49
51
52
53
53
53
56
57
57
58

Fiscal Appendix: A Balanced Plan
for Investment and Growth..........................................................59
Fiscal Transparency 
Fiscal Sustainability 
Sensitivity Analysis  
Balanced Fiscal Plan 
Employment Insurance 

59
60
61
62
72

 7,000

 

DOCTORS,
NURSE
PRACTITIONERS, 
NURSES OTHER . A
HEALTH CARE Il-
PROFESSIONALS
200 NEW
A MEDICAL CLINICS

 

IN
THE COST OF

Health and Seniors’ Care
Canadians value the public, accessible, affordable health care system that the NDP
first created over 50 years ago. It’s a big part of what defines us as Canadians, and why
Canadians chose Tommy Douglas as the Greatest Canadian.
You want to know that your family can access the care they need close to home, and when
they need it most.
Over the past 20 years, our health care system has suffered from funding cuts and neglect.
The Paul Martin Liberals slashed transfers to the provinces in the 1990s, forcing hospitals to
close beds and fire thousands of nurses and other health care professionals.
Renewing Public Health Care in Canada
Under Stephen Harper, the provinces and territories have been left on their own to deal
with the major challenges confronting health care, including our aging population, finding
a family doctor and the high cost of prescription drugs. Stephen Harper has refused to step
in to protect health care, refusing to meet with the premiers, allowing the health accord to
expire, and making reckless unilateral cuts to health transfers that the provinces count on.
Unlike Stephen Harper, we will enforce the principles of the Canada Health Act. We will
bring Canada’s health care system into the 21st Century by working cooperatively with
the provinces and territories to negotiate a new health accord. New Democrats will put
innovation, patient-centred care, value for money and accountability at the heart of our
commitment to health care.

15% of Canadians can’t access a family doctor, a number that hasn’t
improved at all since Harper took office.
To ensure that Canadians can access public health care where and when they need it, the
NDP will reverse Stephen Harper’s cuts to the Canada Health Transfer. To provide stability,
we will ensure the transfer increases
by at least 6% per year. This will put
over $5 billion back into health care
in the next four years to address
the priorities that provinces and
Canadians have identified, including:

Helping five million Canadians get better access to family doctors and primary
care teams by building 200 clinics across Canada, including community health
clinics and mobile rural clinics.
Providing funding to the provinces and territories to hire over 7,000 doctors,
nurse practitioners, nurses and other health professionals.
Making prescription drugs more affordable by securing better prices and
working with provinces towards universal coverage for all Canadians.
1
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Supporting improved seniors’ care by expanding home care to over 41,000
more seniors and helping provinces build 5,000 more nursing home beds.
This is what we can achieve with a federal government that invests in health care and makes
it a priority. We will work with the provinces and territories to make concrete improvements
to care for Canadians.
But sadly, federal leadership to improve health care has been absent for decades.
This has led to Canadians sacrificing needed services, and paying more for required
prescription drugs.
Families should never have to choose between the necessities of life and prescription drugs.
Those living with cancer should not have to mortgage their homes in order to afford the
drugs they need.

Canadians pay 62% more on prescription drugs today than when Stephen
Harper took office. (CIHI, 2015)
Working towards Universal Public Drug Coverage
Some provinces have worked to fill the void created by Conservative neglect of
health care, which followed years of Liberal cuts and broken promises. It’s time for
the federal government to do its part. It’s time to take the next long overdue step
and expand our universal public health care system to include universal access to
prescription drugs.
The NDP will help Canadians with the cost of medications by:

Working with the provinces and territories to develop universal public drug
coverage based on the following key principles:
  

Ensuring every Canadian, regardless of age or health condition, will have access to the
medicines they need at little to no cost.

  

Improving public drug coverage in every province.

  

Reducing prescription drug prices through proven, evidence-based policies, and by
leveraging our combined buying power so that together we can bulk purchase and
negotiate lower drug prices.

  

Streamlining the drug review and listing process, reducing duplication and overhead
costs for the provincial and federal governments.

To support this partnership, we will dedicate funding over four years to
improving provincial-federal capacity for drug reviews, listing and joint pricing
negotiations, and strengthen safety by addressing inappropriate prescribing.

2
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 FIGURE 1. AVERAGE ANNUAL REAL GROWTH IN PHARMACEUTICAL EXPENDITURE
PER CAPITA, 2000–2009
5

4

3

2

Italy

Norway

Switzerland

Denmark

Portugal

Belgium

Slovenia

France

Finland

Netherlands

Poland

OECD29

Japan

Czech Republic

-1

United States

0

Canada

1

Note: CPI used as deflator.
Source: OECD Health Statistics, 2013

Taking a Preventative Approach to Health Care
To truly help Canadian families live healthier, happier and more productive lives, the
government must do more to promote healthy and active living. And the government
needs to take a leadership role in coordinating efforts to deal with chronic illnesses
and conditions.
Strategies to deal with illnesses like diabetes, dementia and other major
health challenges are a good start – but they need to be available for all
Canadians, no matter where they live. We will expand these programs and
target them to those most at-risk.
By taking a preventative approach to health care, we will ensure better
health outcomes. This will help save money in the long run, which can be
reinvested in expanding programs and services to Canadians.
The NDP will improve health outcomes in Canada by:

Providing targeted funding to improve urban Indigenous health outcomes.
Expanding the National Diabetes Strategy to improve diabetes prevention, early
screening and better chronic disease management in at-risk communities.
Increasing grants for community-based research and other communitybased programming, so that local health care innovation can keep Canadian
families healthier.
3
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Improving young Canadians’ health by investing in programs designed to
decrease tobacco use, implementing plain packaging of tobacco products and
banning junk food and beverage advertising targeted towards children.
Creating a Mental Health Innovation Fund for Children and Youth to reduce
wait times and improve access to care, including additional dedicated funds to
preventing youth suicides in high-risk communities.

By age 25, approximately 20% of Canadians will have developed
a mental illness. (Mental Health Commission of Canada, 2014)
Expanding Care for Seniors
Too often, seniors face the difficult choice between entering long-term care
or making near-constant visits to the doctor and hospital emergency rooms,
all the while facing long wait times for care.
Access to quality long-term care is crucial. But it’s not the choice many
seniors would make if they were provided with the support to stay in their
homes and communities for longer. Many family members work hard to care
for aging relatives or friends, while being sandwiched between other family
and work responsibilities. That is why the NDP is committed to expanding
compassionate care leave for families through the Employment Insurance
program, so that families can access the program not just when a loved one
faces terminal illness but also in the event of other serious family illness that
requires time away from work.
In addition to creating 41,000 home care and 5,000 nursing home spaces for
seniors, the NDP will improve care options by:

Developing and funding a National Alzheimer’s and Dementia
Strategy to address these growing epidemics.
Improving access to palliative and end-of-life care, resources and support.
Providing greater support for caregivers by expanding eligibility for the
Compassionate Care Benefit.
Implementing a National Strategy on Aging that addresses the needs of our
aging population.

4
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 HELPING FAMILIES
GET AHEAD

 

1 ,000,000

AFFORDABLE 
CHILDCARE SPACES
OVER EIGHT YEARS



MORE THAN

100,000 NEW

CHILDCARE-RELATED
JOBS

 

Helping Families Get Ahead
The last 10 years have been difficult for families in Canada. It’s been harder and harder to
make ends meet. And no matter how much you try, it seems like you just can’t get ahead.
Families face choices every day – tough choices. What do you need? And how much of it can
you afford? New Democrats will take concrete steps to help improve the everyday quality of
life for you and your family.
FIGURE 2. CHILDCARE COSTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN’S INCOME IN
CANADA’S BIG CITIES, 2014
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

Brampton

Surrey

Toronto

London

St. Johns

Hamilton

Kitchener

Vancouver

Halifax

Burnaby

Calgary

Edmonton

Saskatoon

Winnipeg

Quebec City

Montreal

0

Laval

5

Source: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives

Childcare and Family Benefits
The NDP’s plan will help Canadian families by
creating the first national program for families
dealing with the rising cost of childcare. In fact,
this would be the first major new social program
in Canada in generations. The Liberals and
Conservatives have made childcare promises for
decades – and failed to deliver. The NDP will get it
done by:

Creating and sustaining one million quality childcare spaces at no more
than $15 a day.
  

We will begin immediately to make funding available and work with all provinces and
territories to recognize programs already underway, while ensuring Canadian families get
the affordable childcare they deserve. After 30 years of successive, hollow promises by

6
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 the Liberals and Conservatives, the NDP will deliver affordable, high-quality,
accessible childcare for Canadian families. In Quebec, this means helping the
provincial government maintain and improve the existing low-cost, quality
childcare program.
Our childcare plan will help make life more affordable for hundreds of thousands of
Canadian families every year, create tens of thousands of jobs and boost economic growth
across the country.
FIGURE 3. ANNUAL CHILDCARE SAVINGS AND TRANSFERS*
12,000

NDP

NDP
NDP

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

Liberal

Liberal

Conservatives

Liberal

Conservatives

Conservatives

2,000

0

Savings on childcare in
Surrey, BC

Savings on childcare in
Halifax, NS

Savings on childcare in
Windsor, ON

*with a household income of $45,000

Tim and Geoffrey are adopting
twins. In recognition of the extra
demands of multiple births and
adoptions, the NDP will provide
the parents 70 weeks of parental
and adoption benefits to share.

Tom Mulcair has committed to helping
working parents by investing upwards of
$500 million annually in dedicated leave for
the second parent, doubling leave for parents
of multiples, and closing the loophole that
punishes working moms who lose their jobs
after taking maternity leave.

With these changes, the NDP will:

Add a dedicated five weeks of leave for the second parent, including leave for
same-sex couples and adoptive parents. This will help families spend more
time together in the first year of a child’s life.
Double leave time for
parents of multiples.
Ensure that parents
who are laid off after
returning to work
from maternity or
parental leave will
have access to regular EI benefits.
7
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Making Life More Affordable by Protecting Consumers and Small Businesses
Just getting by day-to-day is becoming harder under Stephen Harper. While Conservativeappointed Senators expense packs of gum, Canadian families are struggling to make it from
one pay cheque to the next.
The NDP will stand up for Canadians and small businesses to make life more affordable by:

Passing a new Consumer Protection Act.
The NDP has long worked for greater fairness for consumers, and the new Consumer
Protection Act will go even further with legislated protections, including:
  

Capping ATM fees at a maximum of 50 cents per withdrawal.

  

Ensuring that all Canadians have reasonable access to a no-frills credit card with a fair
interest rate – no more than 5% over prime.

  

Cracking down on the exorbitant fees that credit card companies charge to retailers and
small business owners, which are passed on to consumers.

  

Ensuring that no bank or federally regulated company is ever able to make you “pay-topay” to receive your bills.

  

Taking action against abusive payday lenders in conjunction with
provincial governments.

  

Lowering the fees that workers in Canada are forced to pay when sending money
to their families abroad.

  

Directing the CRTC to crack down on excessive cell phone roaming charges.

  

Creating a Gasoline Ombudsperson to investigate complaints about practices in the
gasoline market, while strengthening the power of the Competition Bureau to proactively
investigate allegations of anti-competitive activity in the gasoline market.

Building a More Inclusive Country
Canada – starting with its original inhabitants – has a proud tradition of
welcoming newcomers.
What makes our social and economic fabric so strong is our desire and ability to welcome
people from all over the world. We are a country where people can come and build
a life.
Whether it’s Pier 21 in Halifax which welcomed more than one million immigrants between
1928 and 1971, Quebec City during the Irish potato famine or ports of entry elsewhere in
Canada, our immigration history is a proud and diverse one.
Our country can do more, and will do more, with the NDP.
To help reunite families and support refugees, the NDP will:

Remove the unfair cap on parent and grandparent sponsorships imposed by
the Conservatives.

8
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Reduce wait times by increasing resources to reduce the huge backlogs in
processing applications.
Put greater priority on family reunification, especially the reunion of children with
their parents.
Fully restore the Interim Federal Health Care Program for refugees, as ordered
by the Federal Court.
Reverse the Conservatives’ discriminatory changes to refugee determination
and ensure that every refugee claimant receives a fair and unbiased hearing.
Make the visitor visa system more transparent and accountable, including by
creating an appeal process.
Create an ombudsperson for the Department of Citizenship and Immigration to
investigate complaints and monitor human rights.
In consultation with communities, provinces and territories, we will introduce
a comprehensive action plan to foster immigration to Francophone minority
communities across the country.
Canadians were touched and shocked by the image of a young boy on a beach, as evidence
of the magnitude of the Syrian refugee crisis. Municipalities, provinces and families stepped
forward to say they would help.
The Conservatives continued to deny the proportion of the problem, and demonized many
of those seeking help as extremists.
The NDP reached out to the government to seek a joint solution that would allow
immediate resettlement, and put forward a plan to:

Resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees in Canada by the end of this year.
Welcome 9,000 Syrian refugees per year starting in 2016.
Create a Syrian Refugee Coordinator to expedite and coordinate the efforts of
the government, and eliminate barriers to speedy resettlement.
For those who have immigrated to Canada and want to leverage their skills and background
to benefit their chosen country, their community and their families, the challenge is often
having their abilities fairly recognized. Too many foreign-trained professionals are forced to
work in part-time, precarious jobs, instead of putting their skills to good use in Canada.
The NDP will change this by:

Restoring $30 million for the Foreign Credential Recognition Program.

9
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Offering grants to professional bodies to develop harmonized standards for
credential recognition with a single point of contact.
Reaching out to potential immigrants seeking employment by holding more
orientation sessions.
Ensuring Tax Fairness
While families have been hit hard by the failed economic plan of the Conservatives, the
wealthy and well-connected have flourished.
FIGURE 4. CANADIANS’ HOUSEHOLD DEBT, 2005–2015
(Debt to disposable income)
200

150

100

Q1 2015

Q1 2014

Q1 2013

Q1 2012

Q1 2011

Q1 2010

Q1 2009

Q1 2008

Q1 2007

Q1 2006

0

Q1 2005

50

Source: Statistics Canada

The culture of tax breaks for the wealthiest Canadians ends now. The interests of middleclass families need to start coming first.
The NDP plan will restore balance and fairness to the Canadian tax system by:

Rolling back Conservative tax measures that benefit the wealthy, not middleclass families.
  

The NDP will crack down on those who actively seek to avoid or cheat on their taxes.
The NDP will roll back the expansion of income splitting, while protecting seniors’ ability
to split their pension income. The doubling of tax-free savings accounts proposed by
the Conservatives in 2015 will also be reversed.

10
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 FIGURE 5A. THE CONSERVATIVES’
DOUBLING OF TFSA CONTRIBUTIONS

FIGURE 5B. THE CONSERVATIVES’
INCOME SPLITTING PROPOSAL

7%
15%

93%

85%

Canadians who will benefit

Canadian families who will benefit

Canadians who will not benefit

Canadian families who will not benefit

Source: CRA

PBO
Redirecting the CEO stock option tax break intoSource:
poverty
elimination.
  

The NDP will close the loopholes that allow CEOs to pay lower tax on their stock
options – over 90% of of the value goes to those who make over $250,000 per year.
The NDP will redirect the $500 million in savings from ending this unfair tax break into
supports to combat poverty and help the working poor. This commitment will address
situations where options are used primarily to avoid paying income tax, and will not
impact options granted by early stage companies.

Cracking down on tax avoidance, tax evasion and the use of offshore
tax havens.
  

The NDP will create a task force within government, including the Department of Justice
and Canada Revenue Agency, to crack down on tax cheats. We will proceed with
concrete steps to limit tax evasion and avoidance by passing legislation that will require
corporations to demonstrate that a transaction has an economic purpose beyond
reducing the amount of tax owed. We will also strengthen rules around transfer pricing.

Asking profitable corporations to pay a little bit more to ensure we can deliver
the programs and services Canadians need.
  

The corporate tax rate will increase from 15 to 17% on January 1, 2016, keeping
the combined federal/provincial rate well below the United States, and below the
G7 average.

11
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 FIGURE 6. COMBINED CORPORATE TAX RATES

26.3%

28.3%

FEDERAL
15%

FEDERAL
17%

PROVINCIAL
11.3%

PROVINCIAL
11.3%

CURRENT
CANADIAN AVG.

NDP PLAN

39%
29.9%

G7 AVERAGE

U.S. AVERAGE

Source: OECD Tax Database, 2015

12
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 6 1 00,000 TAOR

PEOPLE WILL AUTO FOR SMALL

.1 BENEFIT FROM  
$15 MIN. WAGE

 

PROTECTED

RETROFIT

50,000

HOMES 
APARTMENT
BUILDINGS

JOBS AND JOBS FROM
INFRASTRUCTURE R?g?g?g?
UPWARDS OF
.9

 

90,000 TRAINING
WORK TRANSITION
OPPORTUNITIES FOR

CANADIANS

 

365,000 AFFORDABLE

HOUSING UNITS
PROTECTED

  



76,000

AEROSPACE

JOBS

SUPPORTED
PROTECTED

 

Jobs and Infrastructure
The lost decade since Stephen Harper’s election hasn’t been an easy one for middle-class
families worried about their job security. Under his watch, Canada has had the worst job
creation record since the Second World War and the worst economic growth record since the
Great Depression.
  

400,000 manufacturing jobs have vanished.

  

Today, there are nearly 300,000 more out-of-work Canadians than before the
last recession.

  

Canada has fallen from 18th position to 25th out of 41 countries for the total business
investments in innovation as a proportion of our GDP, between 2006 and 2011.

  

Gridlock is costing urban centres like Toronto an estimated $6 billion a year in lost
opportunities and productivity.

FIGURE 7. BUSINESS ENTERPRISE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SPENDING
AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP, 2001–2013

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

2001

2002
Canada

2003

2004

2005

2006

United States

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

OECD

Source: OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators

Kick-Starting the Economy
Stephen Harper’s plan isn’t working.
The Conservatives have spent tens of billions on tax cuts for Canada’s wealthiest
corporations, gutted Canada’s environmental laws, and put all of their efforts into the oil
and gas sector at the expense of a diversified, balanced economy.
Tom Mulcair’s plan targets support where it is most effective – for small businesses and for
companies that are reinvesting to create jobs here in Canada.

14
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Reducing Taxes for Small Business
The NDP plan will kick-start the
economy and create good jobs by
supporting Canada’s real job creators,
small businesses. Our plan will make this
happen by:

Cutting taxes for small businesses.
  

We will cut taxes for small businesses from 11 to 9% over two years.

Helping small businesses access foreign markets.
  

We will simplify access to government export services to make it easier for small
businesses to break into foreign markets.

Promoting Investment in the Manufacturing Sector and Innovation
The NDP plan will kick-start the economy by:

Ensuring foreign investment and trade deals support Canadian jobs.
  

The NDP will strengthen the Investment Canada Act to protect Canadian jobs and
ensure international trade deals provide a net benefit for middle-class Canadian families.

Focusing on growth in the manufacturing sector and championing Canadian
companies abroad.
  

We will cut taxes for manufacturing firms investing in Canada by extending the
Accelerated Capital Cost Allowance to improve economic growth and help the
manufacturing sector take advantage of export opportunities.

Creating iCanada, a one-stop shop inside the federal government to help
investors turn their plans for Canadian investment into reality.
  

The NDP will work with the provinces and territories to create iCanada, whose sole
task will be to make it easier for investors to turn their plans for Canadian investment
from blueprint to reality. iCanada will help investors access the financial incentives,
government support programs and expertise they need to expand manufacturing
production in Canada.

Supporting a culture of innovation among Canada’s leading businesses.
  

The NDP will introduce a new Innovation Tax Credit to support companies that invest in
capital, equipment and property for R&D, restore the tax credit for Labour Sponsored
Venture Capital corporations, and make it easier for businesses to access government
support for innovation, talent and R&D as recommended by the Jenkins Report.

15
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 The NDP will also offer targeted support for key sectors. We will protect good, middle class
jobs in the automotive sector by:

Improving financial incentives for automakers and parts suppliers.
  

We will fix the Automotive Innovation Fund by making contributions to automakers tax
free to help secure next generation production capacity.

  

We will also double funds for the Automotive Supplier Innovation Program over the
course of our first mandate.

Securing and maintaining production capacity.
  

Export Development Canada, in a manner consistent with its arms-length commercial
status, will be given a stronger mandate to recruit and retain investment in automotive
plants and export-focused manufacturing here in Canada.

Developing a National Automotive Strategy.
  

Working with Canada’s automotive advisor, we will convene
an automotive summit with provincial, municipal, business
and labour leaders to develop a consensus on a National
Automotive Strategy.

Supporting industry-university partnerships.
  

Through the support of university and industry partnerships that
foster innovation in the auto sector, we will help Canada stay
on the cutting edge. The NDP will immediately renew funding
for the University of Windsor’s Auto21 Network of Centres of
Excellence, including partner institutions like the University of
Waterloo’s Waterloo Centre for Automotive Research and the University of Ontario
Institute of Technology’s Automotive Centre of Excellence (ACE).

We will also take concrete steps to ensure the long-term competitiveness of the aerospace
sector by:

Supporting small and medium-sized aerospace
companies to grow and innovate.
  

The NDP will create a new Aerospace Advanced Manufacturing
Fund for small and medium-sized aerospace companies to help
companies adopt new technologies, and scale-up production to
compete globally.

Delivering stable, long-term funding to build capacity in our
supply chain.
  

We will also help build a world-class aerospace supply chain
modeled on Aéro Montréal’s highly successful MACH program by
dedicating a portion of current Strategic Aerospace and Defence
Initiative funding to provide stable, multi-year funding for the pan-Canadian aerospace
supplier initiative.

16
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Reinvesting in the Canadian Space Agency.
  

After years of Conservative neglect, we will invest in the Canadian Space Agency’s
Space Technology Development Program to help Canadian space companies
commercialize new technologies.

Supporting a Diverse Rural Economy
Canada’s economy needs a government that is not simply focused on the success of one
industry or sector.
Stephen Harper put all his economic eggs in one basket, and then dropped the basket.
Natural resources are a keystone of the Canadian economy and will continue to be long
into the future. Diversifying the areas of economic development and growth will make our
economy more resilient and ensure market access for our natural resource products
and outputs.
The NDP will diversify our economic landscape by:

Ensuring Canada’s natural resources are used sustainably to create good
value-added jobs.
  

It’s time to make strategic investments to provide infrastructure for mining projects like
committing $1 billion in federal support for the Ring of Fire in Northern Ontario. The NDP
will also extend the Mining Exploration Tax Credit and support forestry, manufacturing,
innovation and the promotion of value-added Canadian wood products.

Investing in regional economic development.
  

The NDP will invest in regional economic development agencies to provide a broad
range of targeted economic supports for regions going through difficult economic
transitions. We will also expand support for rural broadband across Canada,
ensuring that the next generation of high-speed Internet is available to Canadians
and Canadian companies.

Positioning Canadian companies as leaders in growing market sectors.
  

The NDP will help Canada’s tourism industry recapture the American tourist market by
boosting support for Destination Canada, and we will introduce a Microbrewery Tax
Credit to help Canada’s craft brewers thrive.

Giving family farms the tools they need to remain the backbone of our
rural economy.
  

The NDP will protect supply management, and ensure business risk management
programs adequately protect and stabilize farm family incomes, introduce a payment
protection program for produce growers, and support young farmers with enhanced
skills training and mentorship. We will also boost international confidence in our food
manufacturing and processing by investing in the Canadian Food Inspection Agency.

17
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Building Affordable and Efficient Housing
The volatility of energy markets and oil prices have affected all Canadians – from the
pumps, to their jobs, to the cost of heating their homes. Families should never have to make
the choice between paying the rent and buying groceries.
The NDP recognizes that access to affordable housing –
and the ability to afford to heat and maintain your home
– is essential for all Canadians. Our plan will invest in green
and affordable housing by:

Introducing a green home energy program to help retrofit at least 50,000
homes and apartment buildings.
  

Through an initial investment of $200 million over four years, this initiative will help make
homes and apartment buildings more efficient, which will lower energy bills, create
thousands of jobs and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Restoring and reinvesting in affordable housing programs abandoned by
Liberal and Conservative governments.
  

Bringing in legislation to protect the improvements in affordable housing that will ensure
safe, adequate, accessible and affordable housing for Canadians – safe from future
Liberal and Conservative governments. A National Housing Strategy will include the
restoration of federal government investments dedicated to social housing and co-ops,
reinvestment of funding from expiring agreements back into operating agreements,
repairs and the construction of
new units, and a boost in funding
for homelessness initiatives. This
legislation will also mandate that the
redevelopment of federal lands include
affordable housing and
housing cooperatives.

Providing incentives to build 10,000 new affordable and market rental
housing units.
  

The federal government eliminated its role in social and affordable housing under the
Paul Martin Liberal cuts of the 1990s, creating the affordable housing crisis we are
experiencing today. We will mandate the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation to
provide grants and loans to construct at least 10,000 affordable and market rental units
with any revenues to be reinvested back into rental housing supports. This is a concrete
step towards solving the crisis.

Standing Up for Workers
Stephen Harper has not only presided over a massive reduction in manufacturing jobs and
capacity, he has also actively attacked workers and those who seek to represent them. Not
only has he attacked workers’ unions and professional associations, but the Conservatives
have undermined Canadian health and safety laws.

18
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 The government has many roles
to play in ensuring workers
are treated fairly and are
working safely. For example, as
a significant employer across
Canada, the government has a
duty to ensure that civil servants
and federal contractors are paid
the wages they have earned in a
timely manner.
The NDP will stand up for workers in federal jurisdiction by:

Reinstating the federal minimum wage and raising it to $15 an hour.
  

The NDP will restore the federal minimum wage, which the Liberal Party of Canada
eliminated in 1996, and raise it to $15 an hour.

Reintroducing the Fair Wages and Hours of Labour Act.
  

Abolished by the Conservatives, this law ensured that tradespeople working on federal
contracts received fair compensation.

Immediately repealing Bills C-377, C-525 and other Conservative
anti-union legislation.
  

These Conservative laws make it more difficult for workers to join a union and impose
millions of dollars in red tape on unions and professional associations.

Introducing legislation to ban the use of replacement workers in
labour disputes.
  

The use of replacement workers makes lockouts and strikes more disruptive to the
economy, firms and workers.

To stay competitive, many companies have begun to use temporary foreign workers to help
meet their need for employees. In any circumstances where the use of temporary foreign
workers is absolutely necessary and sanctioned by the Government of Canada, the rules
need to be clear and the outcomes understood.
In order to ensure all workers are treated fairly, the NDP will:

Immediately reform Canada’s Temporary Foreign Worker Program.
  

The NDP will mandate an independent review of the program to make a determination
on whether the program is meeting its goals and to put an end to any and all abuses
of the program as part of the reforms. These changes will ensure that all TFWs, current
and future, will have the ability to access a path to citizenship.

19
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Ensuring Fairness in Employment Insurance
The nature of work has changed and it’s harder for young Canadians to find a solid
footing in the job market. Instead of raiding the Employment Insurance (EI) fund like the
Liberals – who raided $54 billion – and the
Conservatives, the NDP will help young
people get a strong start by making EI
eligibility fairer and by investing in training
that will help workers improve their skills and
get better jobs.
An NDP government will hold EI premiums
steady for four years and invest in expanded training and benefits for young Canadians,
precarious workers, workers in seasonal industries and new parents.
Tom Mulcair’s plan to make EI sustainable and reliable will:

Scrap Stephen Harper’s unfair EI changes that force workers to accept any job
at 70% of their previous salary.
Set a fair qualifying period of 360 hours that will ensure EI is available for
Canadians paying into it.
Support regional economies and workers in seasonal industries by providing
a maximum of five extra weeks of benefits in regions where unemployment is
high and work is hard to come by.
Provide a fairer EI benefit for Canadians with uneven work hours by calculating
all EI benefits on the best 12 weeks of pay.
Protect EI premiums so they provide benefits to Canadians and are not used
as the government’s piggy bank.
Create over 90,000 training and work transition opportunities.
Help working moms and dads with expanded parental benefits, and help those
with relatives suffering from serious illness access improved compassionate
care benefits.
Make eligibility rules fairer in recognition of the changing nature of work.
Stephen Harper’s plan isn’t working. He has slashed EI benefits, continued the Liberal raid
on the EI fund and made it much harder for Canadians to access the fund. Today, fewer
Canadians than ever qualify for benefits, and cuts to Service Canada mean that people who
have followed all the rules are forced to wait weeks before receiving benefits for which they
have paid.
Paul Martin launched the Liberals’ cuts to Employment Insurance benefits in the 1990s
and raided more than $54 billion from the EI Fund. Justin Trudeau says that was the
“right decision.”

20
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Building Needed Infrastructure
After decades of Liberal and Conservative downloading and neglect, Canada needs a
Prime Minister who understands the benefits of long-term and sustainable investment in
our municipalities.
Stephen Harper’s lost decade has left communities with inadequate funding and
complicated red tape that delays construction. The NDP’s plan will provide municipal
partners with significant, stable, predictable federal funding to support their infrastructure
and public transit needs over the next 20 years and close Canada’s infrastructure deficit.
Tom Mulcair knows that quality infrastructure supports businesses, improves productivity
and keeps our cities moving, and that by boosting transit there will be thousands of fewer
vehicles on the road.
The NDP’s long-term infrastructure plan will:

Invest in transit to reduce gridlock and give commuters the reliable options
they need.
  

Our Better Transit Plan will reduce gridlock and commute times across Canada by
investing in a 20 year plan to support municipal needs. Funding will reach $1.3 billion
annually by the end of the NDP’s first mandate.

Increase direct transfers to municipalities to build and repair roads, bridges,
water infrastructure and transit.
  

With an additional $1.5 billion annually by the end of the NDP’s first mandate,
municipalities and communities will be able to make needed investments in their
infrastructure priorities to keep our communities moving.

Invest in national infrastructure priorities to grow the economy.
  

Our plan will invest in strategic infrastructure priorities like northern roads, bridges and
ports to build strong regional economies. We will improve rail safety and infrastructure,
and keep the toll off the Champlain Bridge to help commuters while facilitating trade.
The NDP will continue support for federal infrastructure commitments under the New
Building Canada Fund. We will expand eligibility to ensure that important recreation,
cultural, tourist and ferry infrastructure projects are supported.
The NDP will work with, not against, provinces,
territories, Indigenous governments and municipalities
to make smart investments while rigorously respecting
their jurisdiction. Our plan will simplify application
processes by removing mandatory P3 requirements in
order to speed up construction and reduce federal

interference in local priorities.
By year four, the NDP’s plan will create 54,000 construction, manufacturing and transit
operations jobs across the country and add $4.5 billion to Canada’s GDP.
Unlike Justin Trudeau’s reckless promise of years of deficits and future cuts, the NDP’s
commitment increases investment sustainably each year to grow the economy while
balancing the budget.

21
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Transitioning to a Cleaner Future, a Greener Economy
Canada can no longer afford to stand on the sidelines when it comes to tackling
catastrophic climate change and transitioning to a cleaner, greener economy.
After almost a decade of Conservative government, Canada’s international reputation has
suffered as a result of the failure to diversify Canada’s economy and to transition to clean
energy and technologies.
The vast majority of Canadians have clearly called for the federal government to take a
leading role in the fight against climate change and in transitioning Canada to a cleaner
economy, but Stephen Harper has refused.
The NDP understands that developing Canada’s clean energy sector will stimulate the
economy, create jobs and reduce greenhouse gases.  
In addition to the NDP’s Better Transit Plan and investing in local infrastructure such as
community energy systems, the NDP will make strategic investments totaling $1.5 billion
over four years to tackle climate change and adapt our communities, including:

Improving energy security, affordability and reducing pollution by investing $100
million in renewable energy development in northern and remote communities.
Supporting local sustainable development leaders by investing $150 million in
our communities through the Green Municipal Fund.
Providing support for improved passenger rail infrastructure and restoring funds
cut from regional rail services across Canada.
Reducing water pollution by investing $200 million in wastewater infrastructure
in small communities.
Preventing damage from natural disasters by investing $400 million in flood
mitigation measures and seismic upgrades for schools.
  

The NDP will also strengthen disaster relief financial assistance arrangements with
provinces, and invest $9 million annually to develop emergency plans and provide
equipment and training for first responders.

Making the federal government a leader in electric transportation and
energy efficiency.
  

The NDP will create federal targets for the electrification of federal fleets and strengthen
Canada’s green procurement policy to reduce long-term fuel and maintenance costs,
including the installation of 150 electric vehicle charging stations on federal properties
across Canada.

In addition, recognizing the leadership taken by provinces and efforts already underway, the
NDP will work with provinces, territories, municipalities and Indigenous governments to:

22
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Introduce Green Bonds so that Canadians can invest in a cleaner economy.
  

Green Bonds will provide low-risk financing of up to $4.5 billion for clean energy
development, climate resilient infrastructure, commercial and industrial energy retrofits,
and other sustainable development projects. Green Bonds will be independently
invested and managed, while providing Canadians with a government-backed,
reasonable rate of return.

Tom Mulcair knows that the right choice – the only responsible choice – is for Canada to
commit to an approach based on sustainable development.
Not only is it the right thing to do, but it will also help ensure our long-term prosperity as a
nation in a competitive global economy.
We must start working with the world and stop working against the planet.

23
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 94C 30

YOUTH JOBS,

PAID INTERNSHIPS, 

PLACEMENTS
oven FOU Ans

OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUNG CANADIANS

Opportunities for Young Canadians
Education is the foundation that allows Canadians to build a secure future. As parents, you
want to see your children succeed and have the same or better opportunities than you had.
Under the Conservatives, many young people
have worked hard and struggled to afford their
educational opportunities. But by the time they
finish their studies, they have mortgaged their
future in student loans.
Delivering Affordable, Accessible PostSecondary Education

Once fully phased-out,
the average student will
save over $4,000 with the
elimination of interest on
student loans.

The NDP knows that for many young people, a quality college or university education is the
key to a secure economic future. We will make education more accessible and affordable by:

Phasing out interest on all federal student loans.
  

Over the next seven years, interest on federal student loans will be eliminated. The
federal government will work with the Quebec and territorial governments to ensure
equivalent benefits are made available to students under those systems.

Boosting funding for the Canada Student Grants program.
  

The Canada Student Grants program will receive additional funding of $250 million,
ramped up over four years, to make education more affordable with an emphasis on
helping low-income and Indigenous students, as well as students living with disabilities.

FIGURE 8. AVERAGE UNDERGRADUATE TUITION FEES IN CANADA, 2006–2015

6,000

5,000

4,000

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

Tuition Fees (Actual)

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

2014/15

2015/16

Tuition Fees (Inflation Adjusted)

Source: Statistics Canada

25
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Creating Jobs, Training and Opportunity for the Future
As the foundation to building a promising future, an affordable education should lead
to greater chances of finding a good job. During the Conservatives’ lost decade, youth
unemployment is nearly double the national average.
The NDP will take concrete steps to help young Canadians get a good start in the labour
market by:

Helping to create tens of thousands of jobs for young Canadians in both the
private and public sectors.
  

Working with private sector employers and non-profits, this program will ensure the
creation of 40,000 jobs, co-op placements and internships for youth. The NDP will
also bring in a requirement for youth apprenticeships in all major federally owned
infrastructure and public works projects.

Amending the Canada Labour Code to ensure young Canadians are
treated fairly.
  

The NDP changes will ensure that the abuse of unpaid internships in federal jurisdiction
stops, making sure that young Canadians are fairly paid and receive important
workplace protections. The changes will also restrict so-called “two-tier” provisions in
employment contracts that all too often leave young workers at a disadvantage.

Providing direct investment to support young farmers.
  

To ensure opportunities for Canada’s young farmers and support the long-term
sustainability of our rural communities, we will invest $85 million towards flexible start-up
grants and direct capital support towards access and down payment programs.

Between 1991 and 2011, the number of farms where the oldest operator
was less than 40 years old declined almost 75%. (Statistics Canada)

Providing recruitment and training grants for better health care.
  

The NDP will deliver federal recruitment and training grants ranging from $15,000 to
$50,000, helping to hire up to 7,000 doctors, nurse practitioners and other providers.
Students can apply while studying to help cover their tuition fees and return service
after graduation, or international graduates can apply with the same return-ofservice provision.
An NDP government will also hold EI premiums
steady for four years and invest in expanded training
and benefits for young Canadians, precarious workers,
workers in seasonal industries and new parents.
Tom Mulcair’s plan to make EI sustainable and reliable
will assist young Canadians by creating as many as
90,000 training and work transition opportunities.

26
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 

0
3? 200,000  
SENIORS 
OUT OF POVERTY

OLOSE THE
PAY GAP
BETWEEN
MEN AND

WOMEN

  



HELP WHERE
NEEDED MOST

Help Where It’s Needed Most
Over a million Canadian children and their families live in poverty.
For many, that means living in substandard housing and going to school without enough to
eat. In a country as prosperous as Canada, we shouldn’t be leaving anyone behind.
In 1989, the House of Commons unanimously adopted former NDP leader Ed Broadbent’s
motion to end child poverty in Canada. But for 25 years, Conservative and Liberal
governments have either done nothing or made token efforts to tackle this problem.
The NDP knows that one of the most important ways to judge the conscience of our country
is how we treat our most vulnerable citizens.
Our government has to do more. Much more.
Protecting the Most Vulnerable
The NDP has a plan to lift families out of poverty, and we will back up our commitments in
law. We know the only meaningful result is when no children are living in poverty – so we
will table legislation that sets goals to get us there.
To reach our goal, the NDP will eliminate the unfair CEO stock option loophole and redirect
every penny of this tax break, which largely benefits people earning over $250,000, into
eliminating child poverty.
The NDP will:

Introduce An Act to Eliminate Poverty in Canada.
  

In consultation with provincial, territorial, municipal and Indigenous governments
and with non-governmental organizations, this Act will set targets and include regular
reports to Parliament and all Canadians on the country’s progress towards this
important milestone.

Increase the government’s investment in the Working Income Tax Benefit by
over 15% to provide additional financial support to Canadians who work but
still live below the poverty line.
Boost the National Child Benefit Supplement by $300 million annually.
  

This change will provide additional financial supports to the most vulnerable families with
children and is a direct way to reduce child poverty.

Create a National Council on Poverty Elimination.
  

This council will engage the expertise and experience of Canadians in finding workable,
sustainable solutions to help Canada eliminate poverty. This independent advisory
council will be modelled after the National Council of Welfare.

28
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Strengthening Retirement Security
No one should have to grow old in poverty, insecurity or isolation.

A 2014 report by Statistics Canada showed that the number of seniors
living in poverty who live alone is nearly one in three.
Canadians deserve to retire in dignity. Under Stephen Harper, too many Canadian seniors
are living in poverty and it’s leaving them vulnerable in their hard-earned retirement.
The number of seniors will nearly
double in the next 25 years. The NDP
is the only party with a National
Strategy on Aging that will ensure
that everyone can age with dignity.
An NDP government will complete
the work started by Jack Layton and
boost the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) by up to $400 million, as well as consult
with experts and stakeholders to ensure seniors that are most in need will benefit from this
initiative. The NDP has already committed to reversing Stephen Harper’s plan to raise the
eligibility for Old Age Security from 65 to 67.
The NDP plan to protect retirement security and address seniors’ poverty includes:

Reversing the Conservatives’ reckless decision to raise the age of retirement
from 65 to 67.
  

This will give Canadians access to up to $13,000 in additional retirement income.

Increasing the Canada/Quebec Pension Plan benefit.
  

The provinces have long expressed interest in expanding the CPP/QPP, so the NDP will
call a First Ministers’ Meeting within the first 100 days of our government to get started
on this initiative.

Increasing the Guaranteed Income Supplement to help lift 200,000 seniors out
of poverty.
Amending federal bankruptcy legislation to move pensioners and those on
long-term disability up the line of creditors when their employer declares
bankruptcy or enters court protection.
The NDP remains committed to ensuring that public sector employees are treated fairly
in retirement.
The Conservatives have attacked the public service at every turn, and the Liberals have
already announced that they intend to make massive cuts to the public service to balance
the budget after their reckless deficit spending spree.

29
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 That’s why the NDP will:

Halt efforts to convert public sector defined benefit pension plans to target
benefit plans, and protect the benefits to which present and future pensioners
in federally regulated sectors are entitled.
The NDP has the plan and the team to reverse the damage done by Stephen Harper.
Canadian seniors can’t afford another four years of Stephen Harper’s Conservatives, and
they can’t afford to bring back the reckless Liberal approach of the 1990s.
Defending the Rights of Persons Living with Disabilities
Stephen Harper’s own report on how Canada is living up to the United Nations (UN)
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) confirms that the government
has done little to improve quality of life for persons living with disabilities.
Persons living with disabilities are twice as likely to be living in poverty compared to
other Canadians.
The situation is worse for persons with disabilities living in Indigenous communities, which
have been actively ignored by the Harper government.
As a signatory to the UN CRPD, Canada must take its obligations to Canadians living with
disabilities more seriously.
That’s why the NDP will:

Introduce a comprehensive Canadians with Disabilities Act.
  

Developed in consultation with provinces and Canadians living with disabilities, the Act
will eliminate barriers and promote accessibility, effective participation and equality of
opportunity for persons living with disabilities.

Fully implement the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
  

The NDP will develop a national action plan with concrete steps to implement the UN
CRPD. This plan will include mechanisms for collaboration, monitoring and reporting
progress, and strategies for achieving priorities of the disability community including:
disability supports, poverty alleviation, labour market participation, accessibility, and full
participation and inclusion. We will also bring an end to Canada’s reservation on Article
12 (equal recognition before the law) and ratify the optional protocol that provides for a
complaints mechanism.

Undertake a review of income security programs for persons living
with disabilities.
  

The NDP will work with the provinces, territories, Indigenous communities and
stakeholders to conduct a review of existing income support programs for persons
living with disabilities with a goal of coordinating benefits, increasing accessibility and
improving the lives of persons living with disabilities.

Fix the broken process for CPP Disability appeals.
30
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Restoring Home Delivery of Mail
Over the past several months, Canadians have seen so-called “community mailboxes”
popping up in their neighbourhoods. This is the latest step in the Conservatives’ plan to
eliminate home delivery of mail.
At the direction of Stephen Harper, Canada Post has been implementing a sweeping fiveyear plan designed to end door-to-door mail delivery for millions of Canadian households.
The home delivery of mail is a simple matter of fairness. The cuts to home delivery impact
seniors and persons living with disabilities the most. For them, this service is essential.
Not only will this make life harder for many Canadians, it will also cost Canada Post millions
of dollars to defend this wrong-headed approach in court. Hundreds of mayors have
expressed their opposition to this decision, and cities like Hamilton and Montreal have
already launched legal challenges to the Conservative plan.
Last year, Canada Post made $200 million in net profits. They have the ability and the
resources to restore home mail delivery.
The NDP will:

Put an immediate stop to the Conservatives’ plan to end home delivery of mail.
  

We will stop the Conservative plan that unfairly impacts seniors and persons living with
disabilities, and restore home delivery for the one million Canadian households where it
has already been cut. The NDP will direct Canada Post to develop a new plan to restore
home delivery and to generate long-term sustainable revenues to maintain services,
while protecting Canadian taxpayers.

31
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Ending Violence Against Women
On a single night in April last year, more than 500 women and children who were fleeing
violence were turned away from shelters across this country. Despite these alarming
numbers, Stephen Harper has consistently shown that ending violence against women and
girls is not a priority for his government.
Tom Mulcair’s priority is to end violence against women. We can no longer accept the status
quo – we must take meaningful and significant action to address the violence being inflicted
on our sisters, mothers and daughters across Canada.

“My priority is to end violence against
women. We must take meaningful
and significant action to address the
violence being faced by our sisters,
mothers and daughters across
Canada.”
–Tom Mulcair

Too often, government policy and
legislation fail to advance equality for
women and many other marginalized
groups in our society. An NDP government
will ensure all legislation and government
policy is gender responsive and advances
equality for women, girls and other
disadvantaged groups.
The NDP will:

Create an action plan to end violence against women in Canada.
  

An NDP government will work with women’s groups and Indigenous communities and
organizations to create a comprehensive national action plan to end violence against
women. The plan will have dedicated funding and clear benchmarks, and will focus on
women who are most vulnerable to violence, including Indigenous women.

Ensure that no woman or child in need will be turned away from a
women’s shelter.
  

The NDP will restore the Shelter Enhancement Program ended by the Conservatives.
The NDP will expand access to shelter and transition resources for women and girls
needing support so that no woman in need is ever turned away.

Pay Equity
In Canada, like far too many other countries, there is a substantial
compensation gap between men and women. The NDP does not accept this
status quo and will take concrete steps to address this problem.

Take action to close the pay gap between pay for men
and women.
  

We will enact all of the outstanding recommendations of the Pay Equity
Task Force released over a decade ago, starting with proactive pay equity
legislation requiring public sector employers to take concrete measures so
that all employees receive equal pay for work of equal value.

32
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Moving Forward on Women’s Equality
The NDP has fought for years for women’s equality. We are committed to ensuring pay
equity and ending violence against women. As we work to ensure greater support and more
resources to pursue equality for women, the NDP will:

Ensure access to safe, reliable sexual and reproductive health care.
  

We will enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure that all provinces provide health
services to women who need them, including accessible, reliable abortion services.

Enhance the mandate of Status of Women Canada.
  

The NDP will give the agency a strong mandate to advance women’s and girl’s equality
in Canada while ensuring funding for women’s organizations includes advocacy work
and independent research in line with Canada’s international obligations.

Mandate that half of all government appointments to the boards of Crown
corporations and government agencies are women.
Require that publicly traded, federally regulated companies have a minimum of
40% women on their boards.
Equal Rights and Opportunities
The NDP has a proud history of supporting progressive, inclusive policies and ending
all forms of discrimination against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Queer
(LGBTQ) Canadians.
Canada’s first openly gay MP was an NDP MP. He was the first to propose same-sex marriage
legislation in Parliament – seven years before it was legalized.
There’s much more work to do – and not just at home. Canada must stand up and be
counted in international struggles to end discrimination against LGBTQ persons.
The NDP will recognize and take action on historic wrongs faced by the LGBTQ
community, including:

Adding gender identity and gender expression as prohibited grounds for
discrimination in the Canadian Human Rights Act and as a basis for hate
crimes in the Criminal Code.
Suspending criminal records for individuals convicted of outdated and
discriminatory offences which are no longer illegal.
Revising service records for those discharged from the Canadian Forces on the
basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.
The NDP will also work to right historic wrongs, such as issuing an official apology for civil
servants fired on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.
The NDP can always be counted on to defend and protect achieved rights, including
spousal benefits and same-sex marriage.
Building the Country of Our Dreams

33

 Respecting Northerners
New Democrats recognize that many Canadians living in the North face unique challenges
and will take immediate steps to help improve their quality of life.
The NDP will:

Ensure that the Northern Residents Tax Deduction keeps pace with their needs
and the rate of inflation in the North.
Fix the Nutrition North food subsidy program by immediately including the
50 fly-in communities that are not currently eligible with an investment of
$32 million.
Ensuring Low-Income Youth Can Participate in Sports
There is strong evidence that lower household incomes have a significant negative impact
on children’s enrolment in sports. Team sports are a great way for children to be active, but
also to develop team and leadership skills that will serve them well later in life. It’s important
that all children have the opportunity to participate in team sports.
Less than 10% of youth aged 5 to 17 are getting the recommended 60 minutes of physical
activity each day. Under Stephen Harper, Canada received a grade of D for the physical
activity of our youth.
The Conservative plan isn’t working for our children and grandchildren, and it’s time to
do better.
Whether it’s taking part in recreational sports activities for healthy living or representing
our country on the world stage as part of Team Canada, our youth should have equal
opportunity to play sports. More can be done and needs to be done to ensure our children
are active and healthy. Every child deserves an active and happy childhood.
To support our youth, the NDP will:

Provide $28 million over four years to Sport Canada to ensure youth
participation in sports with a focus on low-income and disadvantaged youth.
  

This investment increases available funding to provinces and territories for community
sports programs through Sport Canada bilateral agreements. It will also help increase
participation of underrepresented groups in sports activities, including girls and young
women, new Canadians, youth living with disabilities, as well as low-income, Indigenous
and LGBTQ youth.

Provide national sports federations with grants to support their initiatives to
address concussions in youth sports.

34
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 SUPPORTING INDIGENOUS
COMMUNITIES

Supporting Indigenous Communities
After decades of inaction in Ottawa, First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities have
reached a tipping point.
There have been moments that encouraged hope and optimism: the day the Government
of Canada issued its apology for the tragedy of residential schools, or the day the Shannen’s
Dream motion, sponsored by NDP MP Charlie Angus (Timmins—James Bay), was adopted
by the House of Commons.
We thought maybe change was coming at last.
But as the years passed, there was no change. Too many empty promises have been made
with little progress.
The NDP believes that not only is change possible; we believe that change is necessary. With
a dedicated team including 22 Indigenous candidates running in this election, we are ready
to make change happen.
It is time for a new era that embraces a true Nation to Nation relationship built on respect
and, above all, makes meaningful progress when it comes to bringing about change.
A new era means an understanding that “meaningful consultation and respecting rights”
isn’t just a catchphrase. Without real, meaningful consultation, our country cannot
move forward.
With your support, working together, we will make change happen.
Establishing a Nation to Nation Relationship
We will work on a Nation to Nation basis with Indigenous communities. After so many years
of broken promises, it’s time for a Prime Minister you can trust to be a respectful partner.
The NDP will:

Create a cabinet-level committee chaired by Prime Minister Tom Mulcair to
ensure that all government decisions respect treaty rights, inherent rights and
Canada’s international obligations.
Implement the principles of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples.
Take action on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s recommendations
on a priority basis established in consultation with provinces, Indigenous
communities and others, starting with a funding contribution of $8 million over
four years to the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation.
Call a national inquiry into the issue of the 1,200 missing and murdered
Indigenous women in our first 100 days.

36
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Remove the punitive 2% funding cap on social transfers to Indigenous
communities imposed by previous Liberal and Conservative governments
and establish a fair fiscal relationship to close the gap between Indigenous
communities and Canadians.
Fix our country’s broken treaty process and deal with unresolved land claims.
Closing the Education Gap
We must not fail another generation. Secondary school graduation rates are 53% for First
Nations students on-reserve, compared to 85% graduation rates for other Canadians.
Inspired by the Shannen’s Dream movement, we commit to closing the education gap to
ensure that every Indigenous child gets the educational opportunities afforded to every
other child in Canada.
To give Indigenous youth the best opportunities in life, the NDP will:

Work with Indigenous communities through a meaningful collaborative
process to develop new education policies and laws based on the principle of
Indigenous self-government.
Make a new investment in First Nations education of $1.8 billion over the next
four years to immediately begin the work of ensuring every Indigenous child
gets the educational opportunities afforded to every other child in Canada.
Continue the work with annual increases over the long term based on an
escalator so that the increase to First Nations education amounts to $4.8 billion
over eight years.
Provide skills training by working with Indigenous partners to renew and
improve the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy and ensure its
long-term sustainability.
Strengthening Indigenous Communities
It’s time we had a government that spends more time working with Indigenous
communities than fighting them in court. First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities need
a federal partner that will work with them as they establish their priorities. And we need to
act on the reality that many Indigenous peoples are making their homes in Canada’s cities.
An NDP will:

Improve critical infrastructure in Indigenous communities such as housing,
schools, and clean water and sanitation facilities with $375 million of new
investments over four years.
Address the needs of urban First Nations, Inuit and Métis people with special
attention to the appropriate development and delivery of affordable housing,
public health care, education and skills training, as well as the development of
economic and employment opportunities.
Building the Country of Our Dreams

37

 Furthermore, the ability to not just maintain but revitalize Indigenous culture and
languages requires focused effort and investment.
The NDP will:

Support initiatives to revitalize Indigenous languages by establishing, in
consultation with Indigenous communities, a National Indigenous Languages
Revitalization Fund and a National Indigenous Languages Institute with a total
new investment of $68 million over four years.

38
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 9 2,500
11' NEW

OFFICERS

SAFE AND SECURE
CANADA

REPEAL

C-51

Safe and Secure Canada
To build the country of our dreams, we must be secure in our freedoms and resolute in our
openness to build a more inclusive society.
Stephen Harper’s narrow approach has left middle-class families less safe, both at home
and abroad. He talks about being tough on crime, but we have fewer police on our streets
to enforce the law. He claimed Bill C-51 would combat terror threats, but anti-terrorism
experts say the bill not only threatens Canadians’ rights and freedoms, it puts families
at greater risk of terrorist attack. He promised smart foreign relations that would ensure
Canada was respected on the world stage, but instead we were denied a seat on the UN
Security Council and veterans who fought for our country have been left scrambling for
basic dignity.
Reckless cuts and empty promises won’t make Canadian families safer. We need a plan that
will ensure that the police who protect us at home and our soldiers all over the world have
the tools they need to do their jobs. More importantly, by building a more inclusive country,
we will create more connected communities, increase our economic resilience and build
the strong, safe communities that will make us the envy of the world.
Making Our Communities Safer
The NDP’s plan for safer communities starts with an investment in more front-line
police officers.
It is boots on the ground that help to fight crime, not empty
Conservative promises.
Stephen Harper’s plan is failing and despite years of his ‘tough on crime’
rhetoric, the number of police officers per capita in Canada has been on
the decline.
For example, this past spring Stephen Harper promised the people of
Surrey, BC, additional RCMP support to help address the city’s increasing concerns over
guns and gang violence, but he has failed to deliver.
To help police protect our communities, the NDP will:

Work with provinces, territories, municipalities and Indigenous communities to
provide stable, ongoing funding to put 2,500 new officers on the streets and
keep them there.
In addition, the NDP will boost community safety in Canada by:

Providing the Canada Border Services Agency with additional support to make
our borders more efficient for travellers, and secure for all Canadians.
Ensuring that communities have the resources they need to invest in crime
prevention and anti-gang programs – especially those designed for youth –
by investing an additional $30 million.

40
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Giving police the tools they need to do their job by tackling the backlog in the
Canadian Police Information Centre database, known as CPIC, a national tool
for police and prosecutors to check the criminal history of suspects and those
charged with or convicted of new offences.
New Democrats will free up front-line resources to ensure that police have the tools they
need to keep our communities safe. We will also make smart investments to ensure that
police can focus on public safety. For example, front-line police have been calling for better
strategies on mental health, like the ones outlined in our health care commitments.

“We need a shift from dealing with the crisis to preventing the crisis from
occurring in the first place.” –Jim Chu, former Chief of Vancouver Police
Department, on the need for mental health support
The NDP will also take steps to ensure that police are free to focus on serious crimes by:

Immediately decriminalizing possession of personal amounts of marijuana.
Adopting recommendations of the Correctional Investigator of Canada to
ensure appropriate care, treatments and procedures are available in prison for
offenders with mental illness.
Improving access to prison rehabilitation programs, which are proven to reduce
the rate of re-offence.
Clear Regulations, Clear Accountability
The Government of Canada has an important role to ensure public safety in many areas of
people’s lives.
Two in particular require focused attention to fix the tragedies and near misses we have
experienced as a country.
The increased shipment of commodities by rail has brought increased scrutiny to the safety
of practices and approaches used by the shippers.
All Canadians were shocked by the tragedy in Lac-Mégantic. To ensure no other community
has to go through this kind of sorrow, shock and anger, the NDP will:

Immediately launch a public inquiry into the Lac-Mégantic tragedy to improve
transportation oversight.
Significantly improve the number and quality of rail inspections and audits,
while issuing strong penalties for safety violations.
Ensure that railways are adequately investing to improve the safety of rail
infrastructure, while making key public investments in rail safety upgrades and
passenger rail infrastructure across Canada.
41
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Protect communities by phasing out unsafe rail cars carrying dangerous
goods, providing better information to provinces, municipalities and first
responders, and taking action where necessary to lower speeds and
re-route dangerous goods.
Few other regulatory roles of government are more important – or more wide-ranging –
than ensuring the safety of our food supply.
Canadians have seen first-hand how the outbreak of a food-borne illness can have
devastating and far-reaching consequences.
In order to better protect Canadians and their food supply, the NDP will:

Undo the Conservatives’ damaging cuts to the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency.
  

These cuts have put the health and safety of Canadians at risk. We will conduct an
immediate audit of the CFIA to address the adequacy of inspection processes. We
will also reverse the Conservatives’ damaging decision to increase self-regulation in
Canada’s food processing sector.

Ensure clear, accurate and verifiable labelling on the origin of food and food
products, including those that have undergone genetic modification.
Work with industry and stakeholders to modernize animal welfare legislation
and update the Health of Animals Regulations.
Fighting Terrorism While Protecting Personal Liberties
Stephen Harper’s Conservatives passed their dangerous and ineffective Bill C-51 with the
support of the Liberals. They teamed up to weaken the fundamental freedoms of every
single Canadian. That’s wrong.
The Liberals have tried to have their cake and eat it too when it comes to Bill
C-51: after saying they opposed it, they voted with Stephen Harper to pass the
bill. Justin Trudeau referred to Bill C-51 as “a great example of what Canadians
expect their government to be able to do.” Then he said he thought it was
probably unconstitutional.
Even Liberal candidates don’t buy Justin Trudeau’s failure of leadership
on C-51.
Tom Mulcair’s NDP voted against C-51 – and an NDP government is committed to fighting
terrorism while protecting our personal liberties. We will:

Repeal Bill C-51 within our first 100 days in office.
Restore the position of Inspector General for the Canadian Security Intelligence
Service (CSIS).

42
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Allow the Security Intelligence Review Committee to conduct joint
investigations with Canada’s other independent national security review bodies,
as recommended by the Maher Arar Commission.
Improve oversight of national security intelligence activities through the
establishment of a special committee of Parliament.
Today, Canada is not making an effective contribution to the fight against terrorism and
extremism. To better harness the valiant efforts of our men and women in the Canadian
Forces, the NDP will take a new approach. The NDP will:

End the ineffective combat mission in Iraq and Syria and redirect Canada’s
resources to saving the lives of civilians displaced by the conflict.
Work with regional and international allies to cut off the flow of funds and
weapons to extremist groups, including the Islamic State.
Prioritize de-radicalization efforts to protect Canada’s youth from ISIS
recruitment by creating a National Coordinator who will work in cooperation
with local communities.
Canadian Forces in the 21st Century
After almost a decade in government, the Conservatives have failed to effectively manage
the Department of National Defence (DND), and have left the Canadian Armed Forces
(CAF) with a legacy of outdated equipment, bungled procurements, and a shameful
disregard for CAF members when they need help.
A new vision is necessary to ensure that our military can defend Canada, protect
Canadians, and contribute to international peace and security with an agile, wellequipped, world-class force.
As a result of Conservative cuts, already long overdue new equipment purchases are being
delayed for years. The attempt to sole-source the F-35 fighter jet while hiding the full costs
was just one of several major procurement failures on the Conservatives’ watch.
But the most shameful failure of the Conservatives during their time in office is the
treatment of members of the Canadian Armed Forces and veterans.
CAF members who have to sell their homes at a loss when they are transferred have been
unfairly compensated. The grievance process simply isn’t working to resolve CAF members’
issues. The Universality of Service policy has led to the unnecessary discharge of men and
women, many of whom have been coping with mental or physical injury that could have
been accommodated.  
Moreover, many have been released without adequate support to transition to a new life
outside of the military. Additionally, the failure to acknowledge and address the problem of
sexual harassment and assault in the military has been well-documented.
Given these challenges, it’s clear that Canada’s defence policy requires review. It’s time for a
made-in-Canada defence strategy that reflects modern global realities.

43
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 The NDP will:

Provide the Canadian Forces with the personnel, equipment and training they
need to defend Canada and protect Canadians.
Carry forward the National Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy to ensure
Canada has the ships we need, and focus on industrial and regional benefits
to support our shipyards.
Ensure fairer treatment of our men and women in uniform and their families by
improving the grievance process.
Immediately address the deficit of mental health supports in the Canadian
Forces, and provide psychologists in uniform as part of deployable mental
health teams.
Reform the Universality of Service Principle, which is unfair to our men and
women in uniform.
Draft a new Defence White Paper by 2016 to articulate a clear strategic
vision for the Canadian Armed Forces and Canada’s defence policy in the
21st Century.
Meet our military commitments by maintaining Department of National Defence
budget allocations.
Improve our search and rescue systems to meet international standards with
respect to response times, and ensure that our capabilities are sufficient to
meet the needs of the North.
Launch a comprehensive review, as part of the Defence White Paper, to
determine how best to meet Canada’s needs in the replacement of our aging
fleet of CF-18 Fighters, and ensure that any new program is subject to a
competitive process.
Implement a fair and open process for military purchasing, ensuring that
Canadians get the most competitive price and that military personnel get
what they need.
Increase transparency within the Department of National Defence through the
creation of the Office of the Inspector General.
Implement the recommendations of former Supreme Court justice Marie
Deschamps to address sexual harassment and assault in the military, and
continue the movement to reform and civilianize the military justice system.

44
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Tom Mulcair would get us back to being #1 in peacekeeping again. The NDP will work
to increase our contribution to UN peacekeeping missions every year so Canada can
become the top western contributor to peacekeeping. The NDP will also seek to contribute
personnel who can play a leadership role and prioritize the contribution of personnel to
situations requiring advanced linguistic, logistical and intercultural expertise.
Treating Our Veterans with Respect
Stephen Harper has clawed back veterans’ pensions, cut front-line services and failed
veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). To add insult to injury, Stephen Harper
then spent nearly a million dollars of their own tax dollars fighting them in court.
The Conservatives closed nine Veterans Affairs offices, which made it harder for veterans to
get the services they need.
Tom Mulcair’s plan will reverse the Conservatives’ disrespect of these nation-builders with
investments to improve medical care for Canada’s veterans and their families.
The NDP will ensure Canada honours the sacrifices of our veterans and provides the
services and benefits they’ve earned by making a $454-million investment over four years to
help give veterans the help they need and deserve, including:

Working with veterans to immediately review, update and improve the New
Veterans Charter, including addressing the issue of lump-sum payments
currently offered to seriously injured veterans.
Developing a “One Veteran, One Standard” policy that ensures all veterans are
treated equally, regardless of when or where they served.
Providing $165 million to improve treatment for veterans with PTSD and mental
health issues.
Enhancing long-term care for Canadian Veterans and expanding the Veterans
Independence Program.
Establishing a formal covenant for veterans’ care that recognizes the
government’s moral, social, legal and fiduciary obligation to care for
Canada’s veterans.
Eliminating the Veterans Review and Appeal Board, which is staffed by
appointees who have often been unresponsive to the realities faced by
veterans seeking disability benefits, and replacing it with a medically focused
peer review process for appeals.
Increasing survivors’ pensions and ensuring funding is in place to support
dignified funerals for veterans through the Last Post Program.
Launching a public inquiry into the spraying of Agent Orange at
CFB Gagetown.
45
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 For many years, the NDP has fought for Canada’s veterans and their families so that they get
the services and care they deserve. We will give the Veterans Ombudsperson greater powers
to ensure that programs for veterans are delivered efficiently, effectively and transparently,
and reopen the nine Veterans Affairs offices closed by the Conservatives.
We will also apologize and make amends to those who were dismissed or forced out
of the military on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity – fairness that is
long overdue.
We will recognize the contributions of police, firefighters and other public safety officers by:

Establishing a Hero’s Benefit to recognize the contributions of firefighters,
police officers and other public safety officers who die or are permanently
disabled in the line of duty.
Restoring Canada’s Place in the World
The country that the Conservatives are projecting onto the world stage is no longer
recognizable to many of the countries we have worked with closely over the decades, and it’s
no longer recognizable to us as Canadians.
Canada’s role in the world in the past 10 years has become one where we lecture foreign
governments at the United Nations and stymie progress to tackle climate change.
An NDP government would work as an even-handed, fair arbiter abroad with a renewed
focus on the UN and other international institutions.
With the NDP, Canada will become a world leader on climate change cooperation, in the
same way the Canada-United States acid rain agreement became a model for the world.
Under Stephen Harper, Canada’s relationship with the U.S. has deteriorated, causing
damage to Canadian businesses and decreasing economic opportunities.
We will prioritize results over rhetoric, take an active and collaborative approach to
diplomacy, and promote an independent foreign policy that’s accountable to Canadians.
This approach starts by working to earn a Canadian seat at the United Nations Security
Council, something the Conservatives failed to do. This is an important step in rebuilding
Canada’s role as a leader in democratic development, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
To make Canada a leader on the world stage, the NDP will:

Bring a clear plan of action to the 2015 United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Paris to advance global action on climate change.
Fully implement Canada’s Action Plan on Women’s Peace and Security.
  

This action will help eliminate sexual violence as a weapon of war and ensure women’s
equality is at the heart of Canada’s foreign policy. We will also increase funding for the
promotion of women’s rights and health, including access to safe abortion.

46
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Ratify key agreements to advance peacebuilding and equality.
  

The NDP will ratify the UN Arms Trade Treaty, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture, and the Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.

Actively support negotiations to arrive at an international nuclear
weapons convention.
Work with partners for peace and justice in Israel and Palestine.
  

Within a framework of respect for United Nations resolutions and international law,
Canada will work towards a two-state solution where Israelis and Palestinians can live in
secure, viable and independent states within negotiated, agreed-upon borders.

Enable Canadian pharmaceutical companies to export generic versions of
life-saving medicine for people suffering from HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria and other
diseases in the developing world.
Reverse cuts to Canada’s Overseas Development Assistance (ODA).
  

The NDP will set a timetable to meet an aid target of 0.7% of GNI with an increase of
$500 million over the first mandate of an NDP government.

These are important steps to focusing on the promotion of health, democracy and human
rights abroad. The world has been waiting nearly a decade for Canada to step up in these
ways, and the NDP will do so.
We will also make sure that our businesses and citizens working or travelling abroad receive
the best support and assistance possible from their government by:

Providing a focused mandate to Canadian trade offices and governmentsupported development initiatives to work with small and medium-sized
enterprises in Canada.
Enacting legislation to ensure consistent and non-discriminatory provision of
consular services to all Canadians abroad.

47
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 SUPPORT
ARTISTS 
CULTURAL

WORKERS

 

STRONGER COMMUNITIES,

STRONGER DEMOCRACY

 

Stronger Communities,
Stronger Democracy
It’s time to restore Canada’s environmental credibility at home and around the world by
putting a price on carbon, making polluters pay and taking meaningful steps to reduce
carbon emissions.
Undoing Stephen Harper’s Environmental Damage
Under Stephen Harper, Canada’s climate record has lacked leadership and been criticized by
the United Nations for falling behind many other countries.
For decades, Conservatives and Liberals have promised and failed to reduce Canada’s
greenhouse gas emissions and even joined together to defeat Jack Layton’s Climate Change
Accountability Act.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions and making polluters pay for the
pollution they produce are part of the NDP’s plan to grow the economy while
protecting the environment.
NDP climate change initiatives will be undertaken in collaboration with
provinces, territories, municipalities and Indigenous governments. Federal
carbon pricing revenues will be returned to the provinces so that they can be
reinvested in greenhouse gas reduction efforts.
The NDP will:

Work with provinces and territories to develop a pan-Canadian cap-and-trade
system that sets concrete emissions limits for Canada’s major polluters.
  

The NDP initiative will recognize efforts already underway in provinces like British
Columbia, Alberta, Ontario and Quebec, and will allow jurisdictions to opt out if their
own carbon pricing plans meet or exceed federal standards.

Reintroduce Jack Layton’s Climate Change Accountability Act to make certain
that Canada meets its long-term target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Tom Mulcair’s record as Quebec’s Environment Minister means Canadians and the
international community will be able to count on Canada’s NDP government to make
polluters pay and do our part on climate change.
The NDP will also protect our natural environment for future generations and reverse
Stephen Harper’s damaging changes to environmental protection laws by:

Affirming government’s strong role in environmental protection
and assessment.
Ensuring and supporting public participation in decision-making.
Incorporating consideration of cumulative effects, regional assessments and
greenhouse gas impacts for all major projects.
Building the Country of Our Dreams

49

 Ensuring that the Crown’s duty to consult Indigenous peoples in the
environmental assessment process is upheld, and that Indigenous peoples’
meaningful participation is facilitated.
Restoring protection to Canada’s lakes and rivers by reversing changes made
to the Navigable Waters Protection Act in Budgets 2010 and 2012.
Restoring habitat protection to the Fisheries Act.
Meeting Canada’s G-20 commitment to cut subsidies to non-renewable energy
and end the federal bias towards non-renewable energy production.
Taking action to ensure Canadian taxpayers don’t pay the cost of dealing
with toxins.
  

We will adopt the principles from the European Union’s REACH regulation to make
industry responsible for assessing and managing the risks posed by chemicals
produced or imported into Canada, instead of imposing the burden on the taxpayer.

After a decade of Conservative disregard for our natural environment, there is much work to
do to repair the damage they have caused. We must also look to the future, and continue to
expand our environmental protections. The NDP will:

Consult with municipalities, provinces, the insurance industry, federal
departments, Indigenous communities and other key stakeholders to develop a
regionally targeted blueprint to deal with increasingly severe impacts of climate
change (drought, floods, severe weather, health impacts, etc.) on communities
and infrastructure. 
Introduce a Safe Drinking Water Act to support provinces and municipalities in
their efforts to keep the drinking water of all Canadians safe, particularly those
living in Indigenous communities.
Introduce legislation banning the bulk export of water across
international boundaries.
Apply a green lens to all new federal legislation to ensure it is consistent with
the principles of a strengthened federal Sustainable Development Act.
Introduce an Environmental Bill of Rights giving all Canadians the right to a
clean and healthy environment.

50
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Parks and Water
We will protect our natural environment for future generations and reverse Stephen
Harper’s damaging changes to environmental protection laws. The NDP will:

Move quickly to complete all proposed national parks and national wildlife
areas, starting with Qausuittuq (NU). Others we will move on are Thaidene
Nene (NWT), Mealy Mountains National Park Reserve (NL) and Edéhzhíe
National Wildlife Area (NWT), and expanding the Rouge National Urban
Park (ON).
Recommit Parks Canada to prioritizing their legal obligation to maintain or
restore ecological integrity as the first priority for park management.
Update Parks Canada’s national park system plan to focus on expanding
parks where needed to protect their ecological integrity, creating new parks
to improve representation of natural regions, and improving ecological
connectivity between national parks and other protected areas.
Review Environment Canada’s protected areas system, and develop a clear
vision and plan for protecting more nationally significant wildlife habitat.
Review and update the National Conservation Plan to articulate a clear path
towards achieving our Aichi 2020 targets, working with the provinces and
territories, Indigenous communities and other stakeholders.
As a country, we need to do more to protect and preserve
our oceans. The NDP will meet Canada’s 2020 target of 10%
of our oceans protected. Canada has only protected 1.1% so
far. We will set a 2017 target to formally dedicate those under
existing consideration.

Formally protect the following areas under consideration:
  

Quebec: Îles-de-la-Madeleine, St. Lawrence Estuary, American Bank of the
Gaspé Peninsula

  

Nova Scotia: St. Ann’s Bank

  

New Brunswick: Shediac Valley

  

British Columbia: Race Rocks, Hecate Strait/Queen Charlotte Sound Glass Sponge
Reefs, Scott Islands Marine National Wildlife Area, Southern Strait of Georgia National
Marine Conservation Area

  

Newfoundland and Labrador: Laurentian Channel

  

Northwest Territories: Anguniaqvia Niqiqyuam (Darnley Bay)

  

Nunavut: Tallurutiup Tariunga (Lancaster Sound) National Marine Conservation Area

51
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Investing in the Arts
The NDP firmly believes the arts and culture sector is vital to our collective identity,
and is an important driver of job creation and economic growth.
To strengthen Canada’s arts and culture sector,
including reversing the damage Stephen Harper has
inflicted on our public broadcaster, the
NDP will:

Restore funding cut from the CBC/Radio-Canada
by the Harper government, and guarantee
stable, predictable, multi-year financing to the
public broadcaster.
Institute an independent appointment process for the CBC Board to
ensure that it’s accountable to Canadians and delivering on its mandate
as a core cultural institution, broadcasting Canada’s unique identities and
linguistic realities.
Reinvest in core cultural institutions like the Canada Council for the Arts,
Telefilm Canada and the National Film Board.
Ensure Canadians continue to enjoy quality, diverse and local Canadian content
on traditional broadcasting platforms.
Support our cultural industries in developing new international markets by
providing embassies with appropriate cultural personnel and funding.
Support artists by implementing income tax averaging for artists and
cultural workers.
Help Canadians preserve our heritage by restoring the National Archival
Development Program.
Ensure that celebrations for Canada’s 150th anniversary are non-partisan and
inclusive, and support Montreal’s 375th Anniversary Celebration.
Ensure that arts and culture are a pillar of Canada’s 150th anniversary by
creating a special fund to support the creation, diffusion and promotion of
Canadian content on digital platforms.

52
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Moving Forward on Women’s Equality
The NDP has fought for years for women’s equality. We are committed to ensuring pay
equity and ending violence against women. As we work to ensure greater support and more
resources to pursue equality for women, the NDP will:

Ensure access to safe, reliable sexual and reproductive health care.
  

We will enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure that all provinces provide health
services to women who need them, including accessible, reliable abortion services.

Enhance the mandate of Status of Women Canada.
  

The NDP will give the agency a strong mandate to advance women’s and girl’s equality
in Canada while ensuring funding for women’s organizations includes advocacy work
and independent research in line with Canada’s international obligations.

Mandate that half of all government appointments to the boards of Crown
corporations and government agencies are women.
Require that publicly traded, federally regulated companies have a minimum of
40% women on their boards.
Closing the Digital Divide
From rural Newfoundland and Labrador to Iqaluit and Powell River, communities across
Canada need reliable, dependable Internet access to go about their daily lives, whether for
business or family use.
The NDP recognizes the challenges when reliable Internet access is not available, and
we will:

Move to close the digital divide and expand rural broadband access across
the country.
Look to support the development of the next generation of high-speed Internet
to support our high tech sector.
Move to create a more open and transparent government by working with
developers, academics and engaged citizens to use government data to solve
problems and improve services for all Canadians.
Continue to be committed to net neutrality.
Leading a Transparent Government
Stephen Harper’s hand-picked ethics spokesperson being sentenced to jail time after a
conviction for breaking election laws is just one illustration of how broken Ottawa has
become under his leadership.

53
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Conservatives have now been convicted of cheating in every election they have won: the
in-and-out scheme in 2006, election spending in 2008 and the robocalls scandal in 2011.
Conservatives even rammed the Unfair Elections Act through Parliament.
Mike Duffy is on trial, Pamela Wallin and Patrick Brazeau potentially face charges, and the
RCMP are reviewing the cases of 30 other Liberal and Conservative Senators identified in
the Senate expense scandal.
Conservatives promised they were going to change Ottawa and get rid of Liberal corruption
and scandal – instead, Ottawa changed them.
Canadians deserve better. Canadians are ready for change.
The NDP will increase government transparency for Canadians by:

Providing clear objectives and timelines for Canadian participation in military
operations abroad and subjecting mission mandates to a vote in the House
of Commons.
Releasing the aims and objectives of trade negotiations to Parliament and
actively engaging Canadian stakeholders in business and labour to improve
Canadian access to strategic markets and create good jobs.
  

The NDP will also set a new standard for open, transparent trade negotiations, which
will ensure that we always get the best trade agreements possible for Canadians.
The recent Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) debate has shown just how secretive the
Conservatives are when it comes to major trade agreements. The NDP will consult
with Canadians and bring greater transparency to trade talks.

Ensuring that improvements to social and environmental standards, as well as
improvements to workers’ quality of life in partner countries, are included in
Canada’s trade strategy.
Issuing a government-wide open data directive to make government data sets
easy to find, accessible and usable for Canadians by default to strengthen our
democracy, improve the efficiency of services to the public and contribute to
economic growth. 
Restoring and improving the Court Challenges Program to provide funding for
citizens and organizations to protect and advance language and equality rights
guaranteed under the Charter.
Eliminating all fees, after the $5 filing fee, to expand Canadians’ access to
information on their government and its activities.
Modernizing the Access to Information Act by:
  

Giving the Information Commissioner the power to order the release of information.

  

Expand the coverage of the Act to cover the administration of Parliament, the Prime
Minister’s Office, and Minister’s Offices, and start implementing the Commissioner’s
recommendations to strengthen and modernize the Act.

54
Building the Country of Our Dreams

   

Subjecting the exclusion of cabinet confidences to review by the
Information Commissioner.

  

Obliging public officials to create the records necessary to document their actions
and decisions.

  

Providing a general public interest override for all exemptions, so that public interest
comes before the secrecy of the government.

Transparency in government also includes ensuring that Canadians know their digital
rights, and have their privacy protected.
The NDP will:

Move to reform and strengthen Canada’s privacy laws by implementing
Bill C-475.
  

This legislation would create mandatory data breach reporting if individuals may face
personal risk, and increase the enforcement powers of the Office of the
Privacy Commissioner.

Consult with business, IT experts and concerned citizens on how to protect
privacy and ensure informed consent as more and more everyday objects –
from thermostats to cars to bio-chips in animals – are connected to the
Internet and are collecting and sharing data about our daily lives. We will strike
an all-party committee to examine privacy issues as the “Internet of Things”
grows more and more mainstream.
End the practice of bulk collection of data as part of cyber surveillance by
Canadian agencies.
Reinstate the requirement for a warrant before ISPs release data, except in
emergency situations.
The accountability that Stephen Harper promised has instead given way to scandals and
corruption. The NDP will increase accountability in Ottawa by:

Adopting a cooperative approach to Parliament, in sharp contrast to the culture
of fear, division and intimidation that Stephen Harper has brought to Ottawa.
Committing to make the 42nd Parliament work by focusing on delivering results
for Canadians, rather than political games. We will work with other federalist
parties through informal or appropriate stable arrangements to end Stephen
Harper’s lost decade.
Checking the power of the PMO by strengthening Parliament through:
  

Improving Question Period by mandating that the Speaker call on ministers to answer
questions asked of them.

  

Empowering the Speaker to break up omnibus bills, like the ones that Stephen Harper
used to ram changes through Parliament in order to avoid scrutiny.

55
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Establishing the Office of the Parliamentary Science Officer to ensure that
parliamentarians have the best possible access to science-based analysis.
Making the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO), our budget watchdog, an
independent officer of Parliament just like the Auditor General, the Chief
Electoral Officer and the Privacy Commissioner. We will enshrine in law the
obligation for federal departments to share information with the PBO.
Ensuring ministers are accountable for what occurs in their department by
enshrining in law the Ministerial Code of Conduct, and changing the oath of
office to include adherence to the Conflict of Interest Act and the principles of
ethical government and accountability.
Closing loopholes in the Conflict of Interest Act and empowering the
Commissioner power to fully investigate, enforce the rules and issue real
financial penalties when the rules are broken, such as:
  

Banning MPs from charging speaking fees. MPs are elected to work for
Canadians and Canadians shouldn’t have to pay for the privilege of hearing from
their elected representatives.

  

Prohibiting parliamentarians from receiving compensation to serve on external boards.

Removing partisan patronage from government appointments by taking the of
government appointments away from the governing party, and setting up a sixmember board jointly selected by the government and the Official Opposition
to review and approve all political appointments.
Restricting partisan government advertising by giving the Auditor General the
added responsibility of reviewing proposed government advertisements.
Ensuring Every Vote Counts
The NDP will ensure every vote counts, and that this will be the last unfair election
Canadians participate in. As government, the NDP will:

Make your vote truly count by bringing in a system of mixed-member
proportional representation that is appropriate for Canada in our first mandate.
Repeal Stephen Harper’s so-called Fair Elections Act, which has made it harder
for Canadians to exercise their right to vote, and replace it with legislation that
will encourage voting and give Elections Canada the powers it needs to crack
down on electoral fraud.
Work with provinces to abolish the unaccountable, unelected and
unaffordable Senate. As a first step, we will immediately introduce
measures to clean up unjustifiable spending, curtail partisan activity
and make the Senate more accountable.
56
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Make sure Canadians who live abroad can participate in our electoral process
regardless of the length of time they have resided abroad.
Putting Evidence First
Stephen Harper never seems to let the facts get in the way of whatever story he is trying
to tell.
While principled leaders approach a situation with fact-based decision-making, Stephen
Harper does the opposite: decision-based fact-making.
He and his cabinet have muzzled scientists and dismissed the advice of experts from across
the spectrum – even cutting their budgets whenever possible.
The NDP will respect the public service and the independence of scientists and officers of
Parliament by:

Creating a Scientific Advisory Council to the Prime Minister to ensure that our
government always has access to the best possible scientific advice from
experts in all fields.
Immediately moving to restore the long-form census and provide the necessary
funding to ensure it can be included in the 2016 census.
Reversing the Conservatives’ policy of muzzling scientists and ensuring that
Canada’s leading experts are freely available to speak to the media and to
publish their findings.
Ending the toxic culture of fear that has emerged in the civil service and
committing to a new partnership with Canada’s civil servants to provide
Canadians with high-quality services in which their work is respected.
Strengthening Partnership Among Governments
Not only did Stephen Harper refuse to listen to the advice of scientists, he actively ignored
Canada’s premiers. He refused to meet them as a group, and actively attacked them as
elections neared. The NDP will build a stronger federation by:

Convening a biannual meeting of all the premiers and the Prime Minister.
The NDP will also bring transparency and balance to Supreme Court appointments by:

Improving the process for Supreme Court appointments by making it more
transparent, non-partisan and respectful of the provinces.
For Supreme Court appointments from Quebec, nominating from a list of
candidates submitted by the provincial government.
Following the advice of the Commissioner of Official Languages by
making fluency in both official languages an essential criterion for
Supreme Court appointees.
Building the Country of Our Dreams

57

 Respecting Our Official Languages
As a bilingual country, Canada has a unique perspective and diverse voices that need
to be heard in the halls of government. The NDP will respect our official languages by:

Reviewing and strengthening the official languages governance structure and
by providing senior officials with clear expectations with regard to the Official
Languages Act.
Enhancing our support to official language minority communities by indexing
the funding for the Official Languages Roadmap.
In Quebec, the NDP will protect workers’ right to work in French in federally
regulated workplaces.

58
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Fiscal Appendix: A Balanced Plan
for Investment and Growth
Stephen Harper has presided over a lost decade – marked by job losses, weak economic
growth, crumbling infrastructure and escalating household debt.
Canadians are ready for a change in Ottawa.
As Prime Minister, Tom Mulcair will lead a government that isn’t simply focused on the
short-run, but that takes long-term fiscal planning seriously. We will ensure that Parliament
and citizens – and both current taxpayers and future generations – are respected. Our
approach to Canada’s finances is responsible, accountable, transparent and sustainable.
Under projections from both the Department of Finance and the Parliamentary Budget
Officer, we will balance the federal budget in all four full fiscal years under an NDP
government, spanning 2016-17 to 2019-20. With the broad consensus of projections for
2016-17 projecting real GDP growth of over 2%, this is the appropriate fiscal policy and we
will run small structural surpluses throughout our mandate. We will fund new investments
over these four years from new revenues and, in the out years, we will also invest a portion
of the projected surplus from the existing fiscal framework in new programs. Our surpluses
in all four years are sufficiently large to absorb moderate economic shocks.
We will strengthen Canada’s automatic economic stabilizers by making substantial new
investments in the Employment Insurance program. And our substantial investments in
infrastructure, childcare and health care will boost economic growth and productivity over
the medium-run.
Surpluses run by an NDP government will be used to reduce the debt, invest in
infrastructure and strengthen health care.
Fiscal Transparency
We will work alongside the experts inside and outside of the Department of Finance to set a
new standard for fiscal transparency in government.
We will introduce a Charter of Budget Honesty based on best practices from Australia, the
United Kingdom and around the world. It will enshrine key values of responsible fiscal
management, evidence-based budgeting, transparency and accountability.
The Charter will require governments to develop Fiscal Policy Statements with every budget,
which will lay out the government’s fiscal goals, including debt-to-GDP ratios, spending
targets and growth targets. It will make the full disclosure of all measures of debt, including
accumulated deficits, gross liabilities and contingent liabilities, the law in Canada.
The Charter will ensure quarterly budget updates are presented on the first of April, July,
October and January every year and by providing an opportunity to publicly measure
progress of the Fiscal Policy Statement from each federal budget. We will ensure that
spending is fully transparent, provide a full reporting of departmental spending online,
using industry standard reporting methods – with all data being made available to
Parliament and the PBO.

59
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 The Charter will require the annual publication of a Fiscal Sustainability Report, which will
present long-term projections for public spending and tax revenue, describe the public
sector balance sheet, and set out summary indicators of the long-term sustainability of
public finances. The Charter will also provide for an Intergenerational Report every four
years, which will detail demographic and economic changes to identify challenges Canada
will face over the next 40 years and how this may influence decision-making today.
Fiscal Sustainability
Stephen Harper has added over $150 billion to the national debt since 2008, while slashing
our social safety net and ignoring the realities of climate change. As a whole, he has added
to the weight of a massive economic, social and environmental debt that will be left to
our children.
While deficit spending was justified during the 2008 financial crisis, the Harper government
has consistently run structural deficits as a result of their reckless tax handouts to the
wealthiest Canadians. New Democrats will end this approach by cancelling Stephen
Harper’s tax breaks for the wealthiest Canadians and by asking profitable corporations to
pay their fair share.
FIGURE 9. CANADA’S NET DEBT TO GDP RATIO UNDER THE NDP FISCAL PLAN

35
30
25
20
15
10

2019–20

2018–19

2017–18

2016–17

2015–16

2014–15

2013–14

2012–13

2011–12

2010–11

2009–10

2008–09

2007–08

0

2006–07

5

Department
Finance Canada
Source:Source:
Department
of of
Finance,
Fiscal Reference Tables

New Democrats believe we can do better, while acting in a way that is sustainable for future
generations. Under the NDP’s balanced, fiscally responsible plan, we will not leave billions
of dollars in unnecessary debt to the next generation. An NDP government will take steps
to put this country on a firm footing, and we will deliver on our commitments. An NDP
government will pursue a balanced approach and will work with the Department of Finance
to set realistic long-run, descending targets for Canada’s debt-to-GDP ratio.
We will run balanced budgets and, unlike successive Conservative and Liberal governments,
this will not be achieved through cuts to the front-line programs and services that matter
to Canadians.

60
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Sensitivity Analysis
Given the current economic climate, we have included a sensitivity analysis of the
budgetary balance to economic shocks. GDP shocks normally lower government revenue
primarily through lower personal income tax revenues as employment and earnings fall, but
also through higher Employment Insurance expenditures.
The Parliamentary Budget Officer provided an update to the Budget 2015 fiscal outlook in
July 2015, at the request of the New Democrats. This analysis used the Bank of Canada’s real
GDP forecast from its July Monetary Policy Report in order to conduct this update.
The PBO report found that the impact of weaker real GDP growth would be partially offset
as Budget 2015 underestimated GDP inflation, and because the Bank of Canada had lowered
its target for the overnight rate on July 15, 2015.
Table 1. Updated Budget 2015 Budgetary Balance Outlook ($ billions), 2015–2018
 

2015-16

2016-17

2017-18

Budget 2015 outlook

1.4

1.7

2.6

Set aside for contingencies

1.0

1.0

1.0

Budget 2015 bottom line

2.4

2.7

3.6

Impact of revised real GDP growth

-3.9

-2.8

-2.1

Impact of higher GDP inflation

0.4

0.4

0.3

Impact of lower interest rates

0.1

0.3

0.4

Updated outlook

-1.0

0.6

2.2

Source: PBO
Under this set of assumptions, the PBO projected smaller surpluses in 2016-17 and 2017-18
than indicated in Budget 2015.

61
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 As can be seen below, even under the two-year projections provided by the Parliamentary
Budget Officer, an NDP government would continue to run a modest surplus. Note that
the PBO update only provides forecasts for 2016-17 and 2017-18, and does not provide
projections beyond that, as indicated below.
($ millions)

PBO forecast
(including
contingency)
Surplus
with NDP
Commitments
(PBO)

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

600

2,200

N/A

N/A

2,009.6

2,047.6

N/A

N/A

Balanced Fiscal Plan
Our Balanced Fiscal Plan is the fiscal framework for the NDP’s 2015 election platform. It is
built upon the fiscal framework presented in Budget 2015, which is the only reliable 4-year
economic projection from a governmental source.
New Democrat Fiscal Framework ($ millions)
NEW REVENUES AND
SAVINGS MEASURES

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Increase Corporate
Income Tax Rate
(2 percentage points)

3,700

3,700

3,700

3,700

Tax Integrity Measures

500

500

500

500

End Fossil Fuel
Subsidies

240

240

240

240

Close Stock Option
Loopholes

500

500

500

500

1,995

2,050

2,110

2,165

160

235

295

360

4

4

4

4

Repeal Income Splitting

Repeal TFSA Doubling
Issue Fines for Rail
Violations

62
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Repeal C-377

2.8

2.8

1.5

1.5

Eliminate Partisan
Government Advertising

35

35

35

35

Reinvest Funds from
the underutilized
Investment Cooperation
Program

23

23

23

23

Reallocate Unspent
P3 Canada Funds to
Infrastructure Canada

0

281

287

12

Total revenues
and savings

7,159.8

7,570.8

7,695.5

7,540.5

NEW INVESTMENTS
SUMMARY

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Health and Seniors Care

355

940

1590

2500

Helping Families Get
Ahead

694

1319

1964

2634

Jobs and Infrastructure

3,043

3,503

3,418

3,295

Opportunities for Young
Canadians

140

251

405

586

Help Where it's Needed
Most

572

635

747

956

Supporting Indigenous
Communities

604

579

529

594

Safe and Secure Canada

184.5

300.5

397.5

494.5

Stronger Communities,
Stronger Democracy

157.7

195.7

223.7

243.7

5,750.2

7,723.2

9,274.2

11,303.2

Total

63
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Department of Finance
Forecast (including
contingency)
Surplus with NDP
Commitments
(Budget 2015)

2,700

3,600

4,600

7,800

4,109.6

3,447.6

3,021.3

4,037.3

NEW INVESTMENTS

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

HEALTH AND SENIORS’ CARE

Renewing Public Health Care in Canada
Build Health and Community Care
Clinics

0

100

100

100

Recruit 7,000 More Doctors, Nurses
and Other Providers

50

50

50

50

Working towards Universal Public Drug Coverage
Provide Universal Prescription Drug
Coverage

0

300

785

1,550

Ensure Pan-Canadian Coordination
for Better Prescription Drug Prices

5

10

25

40

Taking a Preventative Approach to Health Care
Improve Urban Indigenous Health
Outcomes

15

20

40

45

Establish a National Diabetes Strategy

5

5

10

10

Increase Grants to Community-Based
Health Research

5

5

5

5

Stronger Supports to Quit Smoking

10

10

10

10

Introduce a Mental Health Innovation
Fund for Children and Youth

25

25

25

25

Address Suicide in High-Risk
Communities

5

5

5

5

Expanding Care for Seniors

64
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Improve Seniors’ Care
(e.g. better home care and more
nursing home beds)

225

400

525

650

Introduce a National Alzheimer’s and
Dementia Strategy

10

10

10

10

1,865

2,540

HELPING FAMILIES GET AHEAD

Childcare and Family Benefits
Launch a National Childcare Plan

595

1,220

Making Life More Affordable by Protecting Consumers and Small Businesses
Establish a Gasoline Ombudsperson

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

An Inclusive Country
Aid Syrian Refugees

64

64

64

64

Improve Immigration Processing
Times

20

20

15

10

Reunite Families

1

1

1

1

Restore the Interim Federal Health
Care Program for Refugees

5

5

5

5

Restore Unspent Funding to the
Foreign Credential Recognition
Program

5

5

10

10

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

225

0

Establish an Immigration
Ombudsperson

JOBS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Reducing Taxes for Small Business
Reduce the Small Business Tax Rate
(2 percentage points over 2 years)

375

525

Promoting Investment in the Manufacturing Sector and Innovation
Introduce an Innovation Tax Credit

40

40

40

40

Restore the Tax Credit for Labour
Sponsored Venture Capital
Corporations

110

150

150

150

Strengthen the Automotive Sector

25

50

50

75

65
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Support the Aerospace Sector

25

50

50

75

Supporting a Diverse Rural Economy
Boost Regional Economic
Development

10

15

25

39

Support Forest Product
Manufacturing, Innovation and
Promotion

40

30

35

0

Extend the Mining Exploration Tax
Credit

45

35

35

35

Invest in the Ring of Fire
(Financing costs)

40

50

50

50

Enhance Destination Canada
(Tourism)

5

10

15

0

Introduce a Microbrewery Tax Credit

2

2

2

2

Public Agriculture Research and
Innovation

10

10

10

10

Support Young Farmers

10

25

25

25

Enhance the Capacity of the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency

20

25

30

35

Supporting Home Retrofits and Affordable Housing
Introduce a Home Energy Retrofit
Program

50

50

50

50

Introduce Incentives for Affordable
Rental Housing Construction

500

0

0

0

Boost Support for Homelessness
Initiatives

10

10

10

10

Restore Funding and Reinvest in
Affordable Housing

430

500

575

640

Building Needed Infrastructure
Implement the Better Transit Plan

420

550

500

300

Close the Municipal
Infrastructure Gap

420

800

1,000

1,500

66
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Invest in Critical National Bridge
Infrastructure

0

20

80

80

Improve Rail Safety Infrastructure,
Inspections and Accountability

20

80

5

5

Invest in Northern Roads, Bridges
and Ports

40

70

90

0

Infrastructure Apprenticeships

5

5

5

5

A Cleaner Future, a Greener Economy
Implement Cap and Trade
(all revenue returned to provinces
and territories)

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Improve Disaster Mitigation
Infrastructure

120

130

150

0

Improve Water Infrastructure in Small
Communities

100

100

0

0

Improve Passenger Rail Infrastructure

60

60

90

90

Reinvest in the Green
Municipal Fund

50

50

50

0

Strengthen Northern and Remote
Community Energy Security

25

25

25

25

Roll Out Electric Car
Charging Stations

12

0

0

0

Manage Green Bond Investments in
Sustainable Development

15

27

37

45

Strengthen Disaster Relief
Preparation and Training

9

9

9

9

OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUNG CANADIANS

Affordable, Accessible Post-Secondary Education
Increase Support for the Canada
Student Grants Program

25

50

75

100

Phase in Interest-Free Student Loans

90

176

280

386

67
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Jobs, Training and Opportunity for the Future
Create Job Opportunities for
Young Canadians

25

25

50

100

HELP WHERE IT’S NEEDED MOST

Protecting the Most Vulnerable
Create a National Council on
Poverty Elimination

1

2

3

3

Increase the Working Income
Tax Benefit

200

200

200

200

Boost the National Child
Benefit Supplement

300

300

300

300

200

400

Strengthening Retirement Security
Increase the Guaranteed
Income Supplement

50

100

Ending Violence Against Women
Establish a National Action Plan to
End Violence Against Women

0

1

2

5

Restore the Shelter
Enhancement Program

10

10

10

10

4

5

5

Equal Pay for Equal Work
Take Pro-Active Steps to Ensure
Pay Equity

2
Respecting Northerners

Index the Northern Deduction

0

4

7

11

Fix Nutrition North

5

7

10

10

Ensuring Low-Income Youth Can Participate in Sports
Encourage Youth Participation in
Sports Leagues

4

6

8

10

68
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Tackle Concussions in Youth Sports

0

1

2

2

SUPPORTING INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES

Establishing a Nation to Nation Relationship
Call an Inquiry into the Missing and
Murdered Indigenous Women

10

10

10

20

Support the National Centre for Truth
and Reconciliation

2

2

2

2

450

450

530

Closing the Education Gap
Work Towards Closing the
Education Gap

375

Strengthening Indigenous Communities
Improve Critical Infrastructure

200

100

50

25

Establish a National Indigenous
Languages Revitalization Fund

15

15

15

15

Create a National Indigenous
Languages Institute

2

2

2

2

SAFE AND SECURE CANADA

Making Our Communities Safer
Strengthen Crime Prevention

2

7

9

12

Increase Access to Rehabilitation
Programs and
Mental Health Treatment in Prison

0

3

3

4

Increase Support to the Canada
Border Services Agency

0

8

10

12

Increase Support for Canadian Police
Officers

25

50

75

100

Implement a National Anti-Bullying
Strategy

1

1

1

1

Establish a Hero’s Benefit

5

5

10

10

Fighting Terrorism While Protecting Personal Liberties
Restore the Inspector General of CSIS

1

1

1

1

69
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Fight Against Radicalization

5

5

7

8

Canadian Forces in the 21st Century
Provide Psychologists in Uniform as
Part of Deployable Mental Health
Teams

2

2

2

2

Create an Office of the Inspector
General for the Department of
National Defence

1

1

1

1

Improve our Search and Rescue
Systems

7

7

7

7

Treating Our Veterans with Respect
Reverse the Cuts to Long-term Care
for Veterans

15.5

15.5

15.5

15.5

Restore the Last Post Fund

4

4

4

4

Boost Survivors’ Pensions, the
Retirement Income Security Benefit
and the Permanent Impairment
Allowance

40

45

45

50

Enhance PTSD Support

20

35

50

60

Reopen Veterans Affairs Offices

6

6

7

7

Launch an Agent Orange Inquiry

0

5

0

0

150

200

Restoring Canada’s Place in the World
Increase Foreign Assistance

50

100

STRONGER COMMUNITIES, STRONGER DEMOCRACY

Investing in the Arts
Restore Funding to the CBC

100

115

115

115

Increase Support to the Canada
Council for the Arts, Telefilm Canada
and the National Film Board

4

7

21

28

Introduce a Digital Fund for the Arts

3

7

0

0

70
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Implement Income Averaging for
Artists and Cultural Workers

0

0

10

10

Restore International Cultural Agents

0

1

2

5

1.7

1.7

1.7

1.7

5

5

Restore the National Archival
Development Program

Moving Forward on Women’s Equality
Advance the Mandate of Status of
Women Canada

5

5

A Transparent Government that Works for Canadians
Restore the Court Challenges
Program

3

3

3

3

Ensure Fair Wage Compliance

1

1

1

1

30

30

30

Digital and Privacy
Work towards Closing the Digital
Divide

10
Putting Evidence First

Establish a Scientific Advisory
Council

1

1

1

1

Restore the Long-Form Census

25

5

0

0

Create the Office of the
Parliamentary Science Officer

3

3

3

3

Increase Grants Council Funding

0

10

20

25

Expand the Power and
Independence of the Parliamentary
Budget Officer

1

1

1

1

Respecting Our Official Languages
Index Funds for the Official
Languages Roadmap

0

5

10

15

TOTAL NEW INVESTMENTS

5,750.2

7,723.2

9,274.2

11,303.2

Department of Finance Forecast
(including contingency)

2700

3600

4600

7800

Surplus with NDP Commitments
(Budget 2015)

4,109.6

3,447.6

3,021.3

4,037.3

71
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 Employment Insurance
REVENUES

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Freeze EI Premiums

1,200

5,180

5,390

5,600

TOTAL REVENUES

1,200

5,180

5,390

5,600

NEW INVESTMENTS

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

2019-20

Increase EI Benefits Using
the 12 Best Weeks

0

430

445

462

Establish the 360 Hour
Qualifying Period

0

1,207

1,250

1,295

Improve the Sickness
Benefit

0

1,293

1,340

1,388

479

563

583

604

Extend Parental Leave

0

475

492

510

Increase Training Funds
through Labour Market
Development Agreements

0

500

500

500

Expand Compassionate
Care Benefits

200

207

215

222

Implement Faster
Processing Times

100

200

206

212

TOTAL INVESTMENT

779

4,875

5,031

5,193

EI ACCOUNT RESERVE

421

305

359

407

Undo Harper’s Cuts to EI

EI Account Reserve

The reforms proposed in our plan have been costed with the best information
available, but there is always uncertainty when introducing changes to social
programs such as Employment Insurance. Because of this uncertainty, we
have included a small annual reserve that will be held within the EI Account.
The EI Account reserve shown here is not included in our overall budgetary
surplus, consistent with the NDP’s promise to protect the EI Account.

72
Building the Country of Our Dreams

 As I’ve travelled this country from coast to coast
to coast, I’ve heard one thing from Canadians:
it’s time to let Stephen Harper go.
Canadians are ready for change in Ottawa.
I’m ready too.
On October 19th, let’s get started building
the country of our dreams.

Authorized by the registered agent for the New Democratic Party. cope:225-md

 